CHAPTER VIII.  
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF PRESIDENT MOORE AND HIS  
COLLEAGUES IN THE FACULTY.  
 
ZEPHANIAH SWIFT MOORE was born November 20, 1770, at  
Palmer, then a comparatively small and obscure town in old  
Hampshire County. His parents, Judah and Mary Moore, were  
in the middle walks of life, and much esteemed for their integ-  
rity and piety. When he was seven or eight years of age, he  
removed with his father to Wilmington, Vt., where he worked  
on a farm till he was about eighteen. His early advantages,  
even for a common school education, were quite limited. But  
he early manifested an inquisitive mind and a great thirst for  
knowledge ; and his parents, humble as their circumstances  
were, were induced to help him in obtaining a College educa-  
tion. Having pursued his preparatory studies at Bennington,  
Vt., he entered Dartmouth College in his nineteenth year, and  
graduated in 1793, delivering for his part at the Commencement  
a philosophical oration on " The Causes and General Phenomena  
of Earthquakes," which was received with great approbation,  
and thus showing in his choice of a subject that taste for the  
natural sciences which, as we have seen, he cherished in the  
early students of Amherst College.  
 
The late Col. Thompson of Amherst, who then resided in  
Wilmington, Vt, claimed some credit for Dr. Moore's being "lib-  
erally educated," and used to tell how " Leftenant Moore" con-  
sulted him what he should do with his son. The son was very  
earnest to go to College, but the father thought it scarcely pos-  
sible to send him. " Let him go if he wants to," said Col.  
Thompson, "you'll get along with it and find no trouble."  
Four years later, meeting the father as he was going to Hanover  
 
to see his son graduate, the Colonel said to him : " Well, how  
do you come out?- as well as I said you would?" "Oh," he  
replied, " when I've sold my old oxen, I guess I shall be able to  
pay all the bills." The self-denial and sacrifices with which his  
own education was secured were preparing the young man to  
sympathize with other young men in similar struggles, and thus  
qualifying him to become the President of an Institution where  
so many of that class were to be educated.  
 
On leaving College, he took charge of an Academy at Lon-  
donderry, N. H., and discharged the duties of the office for one  
year with universal acceptance. He then repaired to Somers,  
Conn., and commenced the study of theology under the direc-  
tion of the Rev. Dr. Backus, and having gone through the usual  
course of preparation for the ministry, was licensed to preach  
by a committee of the Association of Tolland County, February  
3, 1796. After preaching to rare acceptance in various places,  
and having received several invitations to a permanent settle-  
ment, he accepted a call from the church and congregation in  
Leicester, Mass. Here his labors were highly acceptable and  
useful. Very considerable additions were made to the church,  
about thirty at one time near the close of his ministry, and the  
spirit and power of religion became increasingly visible. His  
influence upon the schools, and upon the people generally, was  
salutary. He was an active Trustee, and for some time Princi-  
pal of Leicester Academy. At the same time he was greatly  
in October, 1811, he accepted the appointment of Professor of  
Languages in Dartmouth College, where he remained four years,  
sustaining the administration of the government at a period of  
difficulty 'and embarrassment in the history of the College, en-  
joying the reputation of a philologist and philosopher, perhaps,  
rather than an exact and elegant scholar in his department, and  
making his influence felt in favor of order, good morals, and  
religion in the Institution and in the community. The Trustees  
showed the estimation in which he was held, by conferring on  
 
In 1815 he was elected to the Presidency of Williams Col-  
lege, then vacant by the resignation of Dr. Fitch. He accepted  
the appointment and was inducted into office at the Commence-  
ment in September of that year. He had now found a congenial  
element and his appropriate sphere. His bland manners set the  
trembling candidate for admission to the Freshman class in-  
stantly at ease in his presence. 1 His kind and sympathizing  
heart made every student feel that he had in the President a  
personal friend. At the same time, his firmness in the adminis-  
tration of the government convinced even the Sophomores that  
they had found their master and must obey the laws. 2 The  
effect was soon seen in the good order, the gentlemanly deport-  
ment and the studious habits of the young men, a gradual  
though not rapid increase of numbers, and the growing pros-  
perity of the College. u His connection with the College was  
attended by some circumstances of peculiar embarrassment in  
consequence of an effort on the part of the Trustees to remove  
the College to Northampton or some other town in Hampshire  
County. The measure failed in consequence of the refusal of  
the Legislature to notice it. Dr. Moore, however, decidedly  
Amherst and his too early death are already familiar to our  
readers. Of his importance to this Institution and the invalu-  
able services which he rendered to it in its early struggles for  
existence, none was more competent to testify, and no one has  
done it with more truth and eloquence than Ins successor in the  
Presidency. " If we estimate the length of life by what a man  
actually accomplishes for the best good of his kind," says Dr.  
Humphrey in his Inaugural Address, " we shall see that Dr.  
Moore, though taken away in the high meridian of his useful-  
ness, was 'old and full of days.' To say nothing here of the  
 
1 See the letter of Dr. Emerson Davis, in Sprague's Annals of the American  
Pulpit, Vol. IL p. 393.  
 
2 See in Sprague's Annals Dr. Emmons' graphic account of the interviews be-  
 
ability with which he filled other important stations, and of the  
good which he did in them all, the services rendered by him to  
this Institution, within less than the short space of two years,  
were sufficient to entitle him to the gratitude of thousands now  
living, and of far greater numbers who are yet to be born.  
Broad and deep are the foundations which he assisted in laying  
upon this consecrated hill. Strong was his own arm, freely was  
it offered for the great work, and powerful was the impulse  
which his presence and ever-cheering voice gave to the waken-  
ing energies of benevolence around him. But highly as his  
various plans and counsels and labors are now appreciated, fu-  
ture generations in walking over this ground, with the early  
history of the College before them, will, there is little reason to  
doubt, place him still higher among its distinguished benefactors.  
It will then appear, what and how much he did to give shape  
and character to an Institution which, we believe, is destined to  
live and bless the church in all coming ages."  
 
" By nature a great man, by grace a good man, and in the  
providence of God a useful man, a correct thinker and a lucid  
writer, a sound theologian, instructive preacher and greatly  
beloved pastor, a wise counselor and sympathizing friend, a  
friend and father especially to all the young men of the infant  
College in which he was at the same time a winning teacher  
and a firm presiding officer, Dr. Moore filled every station he  
occupied with propriety and raised the reputation of every lit-  
erary institution with which he became connected." Such, in  
brief, is the character sketched of him by one who knew him  
intimately both in the pastorate and in the presidency, and who  
was incapable of exaggeration. 1  
 
Dr. Moore was a man of medium stature, but commanding  
presence, weighing some two hundred and forty pounds, yet  
without any appearance of obesity, neat in his dress, retaining  
the use of short breeches and long hose which were particu-  
larly becoming to his person ; and in his manners there was a  
union of suavity with dignity, rare anywhere, especially in per-  
sons bred in the country, which marked him as a gentleman  
of the old school, one of nature's noblemen, and which, while  
 
1 Dr. Thomas Snell of North Brookfield in his funeral sermon.  
 
it attracted the love of his pupils, invariably commanded also  
their respect.  
 
His corpulence gave additional pertinence and force to a story  
which the early students were fond of telling, illustrative of  
the quiet dignity and felicity with which he administered re-  
proof. T., a wild, frolicsome and noisy student one day came  
jumping and hallooing through the halls and down the stair-  
ways just as Dr. Moore was entering the outer door, and was  
very near running over the Doctor. " T.," said the President  
with perfect self-possession and serenity, " you should remem-  
tions of the students and was especially slow to impeach their  
veracity. The same student of whom the above anecdote is  
related, tried the President's patience in a great many ways,  
among others by going out of town without leave. Once, when  
the President charged him with this offence, he denied it. There  
was scarcely room for a doubt that he was guilty of falsehood.  
But taking him at his word, the President said : " I am glad to  
find that you did not go ; I could not believe that you would do  
such a thing." The student went away ashamed of his false-  
his habitual serenity was often suffused with smiles. When he  
arrived at Amherst with his shaved and shorn horse, and some  
of the good people expressed their indignation at the outrage,  
tesy from every student. " No student could pass him without  
lifting his hat with a smile. The Doctor would always set the  
example, and if the first lifting of his own hat did not lead the  
student to raise his hat, the President would raise his the second  
time. I never saw the man who so commanded my love and,  
veneration. If I wanted a school for the vacation, I had only  
 
He was sure always to know how we succeeded in teaching and  
what reputation we earned." l  
 
Letters from those who graduated under him abound in illus-  
trations of his personal kindness to them, sympathizing with  
them, counseling them, loaning them money and otherwise re-  
lieving their wants ; and he always did these acts of kindness  
in so kind and winning a way as to double their value. The  
writers all seem to feel that no other President ever was so  
courteous and kind none so highly honored and beloved. And  
" when it was told in College that Dr. Moore could not live "  
we borrow the language of one of these letters "a deep  
electrical throb of anguish ran through all the classes. How can  
he be spared was the agonizing cry of every one we met.  
Who can fill his place ? Who can do as he has done ? Who  
can have the confidence of the community and the love of the  
students as he had ? "  
 
Dr. Moore was 'too constantly occupied with the immediate  
duties of active life to write very much for the public. A few  
discourses delivered on special occasions, and published by re-  
quest, remain to attest his style of thinking and writing. Among  
these are an oration at Worcester on the 5th of July, 1802 ; a  
sermon at the ordination of Rev. Simeon Colton in 1811 ; the  
Massachusetts Election Sermon in 1818; an address to the pub-  
lic in regard to Ainherst College in 1823 ; and a sermon deliv-  
ered at several ordinations, and printed after the ordination of  
Rev. Dorus Clark, in 1823. These discourses show a logical and  
reflective cast of mind, methodical arrangement, clearness of style  
and illustration free from any attempt at artificial embellishment.  
The sermons indicate a marked fondness for exegetical inquiries  
and philosophical investigations combined with profound rever-  
ence for the Scriptures and a hearty reception of the character-  
istic doctrines of evangelical religion. In a long note attached to  
his latest ordination sermon, he discusses Dr. Thomas Brown's  
doctrine of Cause and Effect, with an independence, clearness  
and justness which prove him to have been no mean metaphysi-  
cian. " In preaching he had very little action ; and yet there  
was an impressiveness in his manner that fixed the attention of  
 
1 Manuscript letter of Rev. Nahum Gould, Class of '26.  
 
his hearers. In the more animated parts of his discourse, his  
utterance became more rapid, and the sound of his voice shrill  
daughter of Thomas Drury of Auburn, (then Ward,) Mass.  
A detention by the accidental lameness of his horse, while on a  
visit to his sister at Sutton, led to his acquaintance with his wife  
and his settlement in Leicester. His friendship with Mr. Adams,  
Principal of Leicester Academy, and afterwards Professor in  
Dartmouth College, prepared the way for his professorship in  
Dartmouth. His success in that office elevated him to the presi-  
dency of Williams College. And from the presidency at Wil-  
liamstown he passed naturally, almost in spite of himself, to be  
the first President and so one of the founders of the Institution  
at Amherst. " All this, as he used playfully to contend, was to  
be traced to what he regarded at the time as anything but a  
fortunate accident." !  
 
Dr. Moore left no children. He bequeathed his property, val-  
ued at some six thousand dollars, to his wife for her use while  
she lived, and after her death three-fifths of it to the Institution  
for the foundation of scholarships, three of which, bearing his  
name and worth about one hundred and forty dollars a year each,  
now help to support three students nominated by the Brookfield  
Association of Congregational Ministers. According to the pro-  
visions of his will, two-sixths of the annual interest of his legacy  
are to be added to the principal, so as to make it, like the Charity  
Fund, an increasing fund forever. As the fund accumulates, the  
number of beneficiaries is to be /increased from time to time. 2  
 
Mrs. Moore long survived him, living to advanced years, and  
acy was to be held by the Brookfield Association, and the interest to be applied as  
above. If the Institution should ever become extinct, or should not give a thorough  
course of classical education like the other colleges of New England, the fund was to  
be given to the Brookfield Association for a library for the use of that Association  
forever. These provisions phow two things : the value which Pr Moore set upon  
classical education, and his uncertainty whether the Institution would be incorpo-  
rated or even perpetuated.  
 
7  
 
through all those years nursing his estate with the most scrupu-  
lous assiduity for the benefit of the College, which she loved for  
its own sake as well as for the memory of her husband. She  
died November 5, 1857, aged eighty-six years. Her remains  
lie beside those of her husband beneath an appropriate marble  
monument erected to his memory by the Trustees. The Latin  
inscription on this monument is a just and discriminating tribute  
to the character of .the first President of Amherst College.  
 
Veneratus quasi illis pater dilectusque ;  
Maximo omnium desiderio  
Faculty with Dr. Moore, and left it as soon as the College was  
fully organized under the charter in the administration of his suc-  
cessor, this is the place for some brief biographical notice of them.  
 
Gamaliel Smith Olds was born February 11, 1777, in that  
part of Granville, Mass., which is now Tolland. He was grad-  
uated at Williams College in 1801, Tutor there for several years,  
and Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy from 1806  
to 1808. Having studied theology, partly with Dr. West at  
Stockbridge, and partly in the Theological Seminary at Andover,  
he was ordained colleague pastor with Dr. Newton at Green-  
field, where he remained three years. From 1819 to 1821, he  
 
was Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy in 'the  
University of Vermont. From 1821 to 1825 he was Professor  
of the same branches in Amherst College, and during several  
years subsequently he held the same office in the University of  
Georgia. Returning to the North, he resided for some time at  
Saratoga Springs, at Onondaga, and other places in the State of  
New York, and in the autumn of 1841, removed to Circleville,  
Ohio, where he spent the remainder of his days. His death  
was the result of a distressing casualty. He had just started  
on his return from Bloomfield, a town about twelve miles from  
Circleville, whither he went to supply two vacant churches,  
when his horse took fright and threw him down a precipitous  
bank ; and he was so injured by the fall, that, after lingering  
eleven days in great pain, he died June 13, 1848, at the age of  
seventy-one.  
 
He was a man of strong mind, a good classical scholar, and  
master of the whole field of Mathematics, rapid in his reason-  
ings, concise in his expressions, and expecting his pupil to see  
clearly what he comprehended at a glance, he had the habit of  
saying, perhaps when the pupil had scarcely caught a glimpse of  
the idea, "see it?" "see it?" It is not strange, it was almost  
a matter of course, that these words should be caught up by  
the students as a kind of by-word and applied as a character-  
istic name to their popular Professor. He was an able teacher  
and an impressive preacher. But during his connection with  
Amherst College, his health was often such that he was laid  
aside from his duties. He was also sensitive to the extreme,  
and in the opinion of some naturally ambitious. These traits  
of character brought his connection with one College after  
another to a sudden close, and embittered the latter years of  
his life. He was once appointed to a Professorship in Mid-  
dlebury College, but in consequence of some disagreement  
between himself and some of the officers of the College, he  
never entered upon the duties of the office. He wrote, and by  
advice of the Franklin Association, published a " Statement of  
Facts " in the case. This was in 1818. During the absence of  
President Moore in Boston and also in his last sickness, Prof.  
 
duties usually discharged by the President, and on the death of  
the latter, being the oldest Professor and in the actual perform-  
ance of his duties, very naturally took his place, and perhaps as-  
pired and expected to succeed to his office. This awakened jeal-  
ousy and excited opposition which led to a decision of the Trust-  
ees that the Vice-President of the Corporation, Rev. Mr. Crosb}^,  
should be the acting President of the College, till the vacancy  
should be filled by the election of a successor. This in turn  
made sport among the students, particularly as the Vice-Presi-  
dent " had never received a public education, nor spent an hour  
as a student in any College. Thus things jumbled along till  
Commencement, the Vice-President attending chapel exercises  
and sitting in Dr. Moore's study, and part of the time having  
one of the members of the Faculty present to tell him what to  
do when a student called on him with a question or request.  
He also presided at Commencement and made many blunders,  
miscalling the names of the performers, etc. He miscalled my  
name, and I waited to have it corrected before I took the plat-  
form. Prof. Olds bore all this with a Christian spirit, doing what  
he could to make the occasion go off respectably for the sake of  
the students and the Institution. This done he demanded an  
investigation before the Board of Trustees. This was granted,  
and the meeting was held in the hall of Boltwood's Hotel. . The  
Dr. Humphrey, and at the reorganization of the Faculty under  
the charter, Professors Fiske and Peck took the place of Prof.  
Olds in the Faculty.  
 
Besides his Inaugural Oration at Williams College, 1806,  
Prof. Olds published the substance of eight sermons on Episco-  
pacy and Presbyterian Parity, 1815. " His last years were years  
of active and earnest service in the ministry of the gospel, and  
when he died, the public papers in the region in which he had  
 
Joseph Estabrook was born in Lebanon, N. H., December 8,  
1792. He was graduated at Dartmouth College, in 1815, and  
took his second degree both at Dartmouth and Williams in 1818.  
He first intended to be a minister, and commenced the study of  
Theology at Princeton. But owing to a bronchial affection, he  
soon left the Seminary, and turned his attention to teaching.  
From 1817 to 1820, he was Principal of Amherst Acadera}-,  
and from 1821 to 1824 Professor of the Latin and Greek Lan-  
guages and Librarian in Amherst College. He is said to have  
been one of the most popular and successful of all the Princi-  
pals of Amherst Academy. In the College he does not seem to  
have been so acceptable. Judging from the letters of alumni  
who were under his instructions, we should infer, that he made  
no very deep or strong impression on his pupils either as a man,  
a scholar or a teacher, for. they make little or no allusion to  
him. He is remembered in town for his elegant ruffle shirt, his  
fine suwarrow boots, and the great quantities of snuff which,  
tradition says, he carried in his coat pocket. He was a good  
shot as was demonstrated by the fact preserved by the memory  
of some of the older inhabitants that on his way to "meeting"  
one Fast day, seeing a flock of pigeons flying high overhead, he  
snatched a gun from the hand of a fowler, and brought down a  
bird from his flight. A far more marvelous yet well authenti-  
cated story is told of him, which not only illustrates his own  
life and times, but bears on the great principles of Psychology  
and Theology. There was a lottery to aid in the building of  
the Northampton bridge. The young men of Amherst were  
eagerly rushing in for a chance at the prizes. But Mr. Estabrook  
had little money to spare and' none to waste on uncertainties.  
As his mind dwelt on the subject by day, however, he dreamed  
one night that he had bought a ticket of a certain number and  
drawn a prize of five thousand dollars. He went over to North-  
ampton, found that ticket unsold, bought it, and actually drew a  
prize of five thousand dollars, one thousand of which he gave  
to Amherst College.  
 
Compelled to seek a southern climate on account of his throat,  
he left Amherst in 1824, and became the successful proprietor  
 
Staunton, Va., and then in Knoxville, -Tenn. His success in  
the latter, led to his appointment to the presidency of the Uni-  
versity of East Tennessee, which he organized anew and con-  
ducted for several years with several Professors, educated at  
Amherst, and which under his administration enjoyed a degree  
of prosperity, such as it never before nor since experienced.  
He resigned this position at the close of the summer term in  
1847, having been thirteen years at the head of the University,  
and for about thirty years engaged in teaching.  
 
On his retirement from the University, he removed to Ander-  
son County, Tenn., about twenty-five miles from Knoxville, and  
engaged in the difficult and hazardous enterprise of boring for  
salt water and manufacturing salt. After a large outlay of  
capital, the conquest of many obstacles and the devotion of  
some seven years' time, when his plans were apparently just on  
the eve of a successful realization, he was prostrated by an  
attack of disease and in a few days removed from among the  
living. He died on Friday, May 18, 1855, having completed  
the sixty-second year of his age.  
 
Prof. Amos Eaton, who lectured on Chemistry and some  
branches of Natural History, and helped to give a scientific bent  
to some of the early graduates and to the College itself, was a  
remarkable character, and led an eventful life. Born in 1776,  
an apprenticed blacksmith in 1791; in 1799 a graduate of Wil-  
liams College, afterwards a student of law, and admitted to the  
bar under Alexander Hamilton ; imprisoned a little while for an  
act which, it is generally conceded, involved no moral obliquity,  
and soon released by act of the Governor; a student of the  
Natural Sciences at Yale College, and a lecturer on the same in  
Williams College, and in Albany by invitation of De Witt Clin-  
ton; Geological Surveyor of the country adjacent to the Erie  
Canal, from 1820 to 1826 ; Professor of Botany, Chemistry and  
Natural Philosophy in the medical school at Castleton, Vt., and  
subsequently, for many years, Principal of the Rensselaer Insti-  
tute at Troy, N. Y., thus emerging from obscurity and reproach  
and passing through a singular variety of occupations and vicissi-  
 
lecturer and a pioneer in the natural sciences. His geological  
survey was far in advance of anything of the kind which pre-  
ceded it. His manual of botany passed through many editions,  
taking the title of American Botany in the eighth, and was for  
years the standard work in that science. He also published an  
Index to the Geology of the Northern States, and contributed  
numerous papers for Silliman's Journal. He died at Troy, N. Y.,  
May 10, 1842, at the age of sixty-five.  
 
The Tutors under the presidency of Dr. Moore, Lucius Field,  
William S. Burt, Elijah L. Coe and Zenas Clapp, are mentioned  
uated at Williams in 1821, and at Andover in 1825 ; settled  
pastor at Tyringham, Mass., in 1833, and after supplying several  
other churches at different times, died at Northfield, June 1,  
1839, aged forty-two. He came to Amherst with President  
Moore directly after his graduation, and was Tutor only the first  
year.  
 
William Skinner Burt was a native of South Wilbraham ; grad-  
uated at Union College in 1818, and spent the remainder of his  
life in teaching at Belchertown, Amherst, Monson, Newburg,  
N. Y., and Ithaca, N. Y., where he died in 1855. He was an  
able and popular teacher, and fitted many for College, among  
whom were Dr. Bridgman of the Class of '26, and Dr. Russell of  
the Class of '29. He was a teacher and a superintendent of the  
Sabbath-school in Amherst, and some of the good people of the  
came immediately to Amherst ; was Tutor here from 1822 till  
1823. His active usefulness in the first revival is gratefully re-  
corded by some of the early alumni.  
 
Zenas Clapp was born at Deerfield, January 30, 1796; grad-  
uated at Dartmouth in 1821 ; was Tutor in Amherst, 1823-4 ;  
studied theology at Auburn; taught in several Academies in  
Massachusetts and New York, and died in Florida, January 29,  
1837, aged forty-one.  
 
