Amherst College DUrING ITS FIRST HALF CENTURY.  1821-1871.  
BY W. S. TYLER,  
OF THE CLASS OF 1830,  
Williston Professor of the Greek Language and Literature.  
 
SPRINGFIELD, MASS.:  
 
CLARK W. BRYAN & COMPANY,  
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.  
 
CLARK W. BRYAN AND COMPANY,  
PRINTERS AND ELECTROTTPEBS,  
 
AT WHOSE INSTANCE THIS WORK WAS  
UNDERTAKEN, AND WHO MUST ALWAYS CHIEFLY MAKE THE  
HISTORY OF THE COLLEGE,  
THIS HISTORY OF ITS FIRST HALF CENTURY  
IS AFFECTIONATELY  
 
THIS History was a part of the plan for the Semi-Centennial  
Celebration, and was at first intended to be in readiness for  
that occasion. The action of the Alumni and of the Trustees  
on the subject is narrated at the opening of the chapter touch-  
ing the Jubilee, and may be found at page 595. The failure  
of the author's health rendered it necessary for him to defer  
the work for some time, and seek recuperation ; and although  
by rest, with change of scene, this object was at length suc-  
cessfully accomplished, yet between the necessity of carefully  
guarding what was thus gained, and the daily occupation of  
College duties, he has been able to devote only a short time,  
two or three hours a day at most, to this extra labor. After  
the work of preparation was substantially done, unexpected  
delays, which need not be detailed, arose in regard to the pub-  
lication.  
 
Prepared at the request of the Alumni and dedicated to them,  
the History has been written with constant reference to them  
as its most sympathizing and probably most numerous readers.  
Some of the best parts of it have been contributed by the  
Alumni themselves. A circular was sent to each Alumnus,  
at the outset, requesting him to " photograph for the author's  
use the College as it was in his day, his own class, any indi-  
classes, and the contents have been freely used, in whole or in  
part, in form or in substance, as seemed best. The unity and  
perchance the dignity of history may thus have been somewhat  
sacrificed. But more than was thus lost, has been gained in  
variety and life-like reality, in anecdote and dramatic interest,  
in the twofold and so more impartial and complete view of  
College life thus presented from the standing point of the stu-  
dent as well as the professor. All who sent such responses will  
please accept my thanks, and if any of them wonder why I have  
not made more direct or more extended use of their contribu-  
tions, the dimensions to which the History has already grown,  
may suggest a sufficient explanation.  
 
It is doubtless generally understood, although a few of my  
correspondents seem to have been mistaken on this point, that  
this is a History of the College and not of its graduates. At my  
instance and the request of the Faculty, Prof. Crowell and Prof.  
Montague have just commenced the collection of materials for  
the latter, which will be published as soon as the work can be  
prepared and a sufficient number of subscribers has been ob-  
tained. In writing the History of the College, I have thought  
it proper to relate the early periods with especial fullness, and  
also to dwell upon the lives of the founders, the fathers and the  
benefactors of the Institution, for the obvious reason that the  
actors and witnesses of these events are fast passing away and  
the sources of information will soon be dried up. The death,  
since I began to write, of two or three persons to whom I have  
been indebted for facts of great interest and importance, of which  
they were the sole repositories, has demonstrated the wisdom of  
this course. I set out with the purpose of writing biographical  
sketches only of the deceased. But as I advanced, I found it  
impossible to adhere to this purpose without doing injustice,  
relatively at least, both to the living and the dead. This change  
 
of plan will doubtless be observed by my readers, and the rea-  
son, not to say necessity for it, will justify, I hope, the liberty  
contemplated, and are a clear addition to what was promised in  
the prospectus. They have been prepared with great care and  
expense, and will, we are sure, add 'much to the value and in-  
terest of the volume. We only regret that likenesses of many  
other officers and benefactors could not be included. The en-  
graving of President Moore is taken from a portrait in the Col-  
lege Library; that of President Humphrey from a portrait in  
the possession of Mrs. James Humphrey of Brooklyn. The  
others are all taken from photographs of the originals.  
 
For the biographical sketch beginning on page 575 and the  
accompanying portrait, I disclaim all responsibility. I found  
in the letters of loving and grateful pupils not a few intima-  
tions that the author would hold no unimportant place in the  
History, if it were impartially written. But I gave no heed nor  
credence to these suggestions. At length, however, as I was  
drawing near to the close of the work, the Alumni Committee  
having previously spied out the land, a surprise party took pos-  
the request of the Alumni and particularly for their reading,  
it is, at the same time, naturally and almost necessarily, more or  
less, a history also of Amherst and the neighboring towns, of  
Hampshire County and the Valley of the Connecticut, espe-  
cially as they were in those early times when Amherst College  
was the spontaneous outgrowth of such a soil and such a people,  
to the Alumni who first opened to me this grateful opportunity  
of identifying myself with the history of Alma Mater, to their  
Committee who have rendered me every assistance in their  
power, to the Trustees and Faculty who have aided and encour-  
aged me at every stage of the work, to the publishers who have  
spared neither pains nor expense to bring out the book and the  
illustrations in a style worthy of the College and creditable to  
Western Massachusetts, and above all to the kind Providence  
that has preserved my life and enabled me to complete a work  
 
P.S. Just as the work of electrotyping this History was  
almost finished and that of printing was about to begin, the plates  
were destroyed in the great Springfield fire. They have been  
re-cast with all possible despatch, and now the book goes forth  
to its readers unchanged yet renewed, to be prized none the  
less, I trust, because risen like the fabled Phrenix from its own  
ashes. If the faith and patience of subscribers have been sorely  
taxed, those of the author have been more severely tried by this  
delay. But the publishers have been the chief sufferers. And  
they deserve, what I hope they will receive, not only the sym-  
pathy but the substantial support and remuneration of the  
alumni and friends of the College for the indomitable energy  
and perseverance with which they have done over again their  
entire work and reproduced the History in all its original beauty  
of form.  
 
AMHERST COLLEGE, May 1, 1873.  
 
