CHAPTER XVIII.  
 
RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF THIS PERIOD (1845-54).  
 
" THE religious bearings and uses of education paramount to  
all others," was the main theme of Dr. Hitchcock's Inaugural  
Address. After a rapid survey of the entire and vast circle of  
human learning, he thus expresses the result : " Is not every  
mind forced irresistibly to the conclusion that every branch was  
originally linked by a golden chain to the throne of God ; and  
that the noblest use to which they can be consecrated and for  
which they were destined, is to illustrate his perfections and  
to display his glory." With such a view of the chief end of  
education, he could not content himself with making all litera-  
ture and science tributary to religion in the lecture-room he  
could not but summon himself and his associates to direct efforts  
for promoting Christian piety as the highest end and aim of a  
Christian College.  
 
In common with his predecessors in the presidency and his as-  
sociates in the Faculty, Dr. Hitchcock believed that revivals of  
religion at special seasons, and those of frequent occurrence,  
were hi harmony with the economy of nature and Providence,  
and that periodical revivals were especially in harmony with  
College life, in which everything is periodical. His labors as a  
pastor had been blessed with revivals. In all the revivals which  
Amherst College had experienced except the first, he had been  
present, and he participated in the labors connected with the  
first, and at the request of Dr. Moore preached a sermon at its  
close. One of the revivals under the presidency of his prede-  
 
Hitchcock. And when he came into the presidency, no object  
lay nearer his heart than a revival of religion which should  
Thursday evening lecture, the class prayer-meetings and all  
the other means which had been previously used, he now insti-  
tuted a meeting for prayer and religious conference at his own  
house, which, besides uniting the hearts of Christians to each  
other and their pastor, proved one of the most effective instru-  
mentalities of reviving religion in the College. " I had always  
felt it to be desirable," he says, " that a meeting where some-  
what more familiar relations could be established between the  
pastor and his flock would be desirable,- and accordingly when I  
assumed the presidency, I privately informed one or two mem-  
bers of the Senior class that every Monday evening, at a certain  
hour, my study would be open to any members of College who  
might like to spend a half hour (to which time I should rigidly  
limit the meeting) in prayer and religious conference. I told  
them that I should generally call on them for prayers and that I  
would then make familiar remarks upon some practical question,  
proposed at the preceding meeting, and would be glad also to  
hear their remarks. I sat at my study table, and the room was  
usually so closel}" packed that we could not even kneel in prayer.  
It seemed like a great family at morning or evening prayers,  
conversing upon experimental religion, and I do not doubt that  
the home feeling this produced, had much to do with the inter-  
est which the meeting seemed to excite. At the season of the  
year when the annual Fast for Colleges occurs, I directed my  
questions to subjects adapted to prepare Christians for a special  
work of grace. In times of revival the numbers increased so  
much as to drive us out of my study, and my family used every  
week to fill one of the large parlors of the President's house  
with seats. But when the meetings were so manifestly blessed  
of God, I did not dare to transfer the meeting to one of the  
public rooms in College, lest its peculiar attractions should be  
destroyed. I rejoice that I did not ; for in subsequent years, by  
letters from graduates, I found that probably no other religious  
 
effort which I ever made was so blessed of God as this. Some-  
times thrilling incidents occurred in the meetings ; and some-  
times the prayers made by my young brethren had an unction,  
an eloquence and a power which I have never heard elsewhere,  
and whose impression remains upon my memory to this day." 1  
The good President has not exaggerated the influence of that  
Monday evening prayer-meeting. Its stirring and solemn scenes  
were impressed not more vividly or indelibly on his mind than  
they were on the minds of the students who attended them, and  
scarcely a letter have I received from an alumnus relating to the  
religious history of this period, which does not make more or  
less reference to that meeting.  
 
Less than a year after Dr. Hitchcock's accession, during the  
first winter term of his presidency, the College was blessed with  
a very interesting revival of religion ; and it was in large meas-  
ure the fruit of those well-directed questions and wise measures  
connected with the first College Fast, which have just been nar-  
rated. By comparing dates, the reader will see that this was a  
time of much discouragement and depression in the financial  
condition of the College; and this season of spiritual refresh-  
ing, while it greatly cheered the hearts of the President and Pro-  
fessors under these discouragements, was the prophet and fore-  
runner of the outward prosperity that soon followed.  
 
The following narrative of this revival of 1846, is from the  
pen of one who, then a member of the Se'nior class, was deeply  
interested in it, and whose own labors in the ministry have often  
been blessed with similar revivals: 2 " For several weeks of the  
winter term, a meeting had been held in the President's study  
on Monday evening, to offer special prayer for the baptism of  
the Holy Spirit. It was not largely attended at first, only the  
more active and earnest Christians of the College being present;  
but as the holy fire kindled and spread, the number increased,  
until the room became crowded with quickened and earnest  
souls, whose prayers were increasingly fervent and believing  
week by week. As yet professors of religion only, had come  
in. One evening we noticed among us a member of the Fresh-  
 
man class, who was not a Christian. We looked upon his pres-  
ence as an unmistakable indication that God had begun to an-  
swer our prayers. The meeting went on. Faith and hope were  
greatly strengthened. All hearts were poured out in prayer more  
fervently than ever. The last prayer was offered, the last word  
spoken, and we were about to turn away, when this young man  
arose and asked us to stay for a moment. I remember distinctly  
just where he stood and how he appeared, when he said : ' My  
friends, the Spirit of God has been striving with me many days.  
I have resisted his strivings. I have resolved and sought to  
banish my convictions, but I can not succeed. I feel myself to  
said the President. All bent upon their knees, and all hearts  
were as one in the pleadings that went up before the mercy-seat.  
A day or two only passed, before this young man came out in-  
to the light of a new life, and began an earnest work for Christ,  
which he continued throughout his College course, and has now  
been prosecuting for many years as a missionary to China. Rev.  
Charles Hartwell was the first convert of that revival.  
 
" From that time the work went rapidly forward, bringing  
into the kingdom many members of each of the two lower class-  
es, and a few from the Junior class. Nearly all of my class were  
already Christians by profession or in hope.  
 
" I remember several cases of great interest. Among them  
was that of ' Dunn Brown.' l I see him now, bowed under the  
burden of his guilt, his countenance a picture of utmost agony,  
and of very despair, seemingly about sinking into the earth, or  
even into the bottomless pit. I saw him, one evening in par-  
ticular, in the old rhetorical room, during a sermon of Prof.  
Fiske's, from the words : ' And they considered not in their hearts  
that I remember all their wickedness.' I never knew a case in  
which ' law- work ' was more thoroughly done than in his. It  
went on with him in the same manner for two or three days,  
when the storm passed over, the sunshine came, all was serene  
and peaceful, and he became one of the happiest and most cheer-  
 
1 The well-known nom de plume of Samuel Fisk, Class of '48.  
 
ful of Christians, living for Christ while he lived, and at length  
sweetly falling asleep in him.  
 
" I have mentioned a sermon of Prof. Fiske. It did seem to  
me at that time, that I had never listened to a sermon of such  
power, and my memories of it to-day are much the same with  
my impressions of it then.^ All the preaching of all the Pro-  
fessors was good, but I think it no disparagement to that of  
any of the others, when I say that Prof. Fiske's preaching was  
most pungent and powerful of all. In the earlier stages of the  
revival, his health was so feeble, that he could do almost noth-  
ing publicly, yet his interest in the beginning and progress of  
the work was intense. I remember going early into his recita-  
tion one morning, and finding him there alone. He at once in-  
quired into the state of the work, and on my mentioning many  
hopeful indications, and giving him some incidents of interest,  
his eyes filled with tears, and he went on to tell in tremulous  
tones, what a sorrow it was to him 'to be denied the privilege  
of active participation in the work, at the same time expressing  
his joy that the Lord could carry it forward without his help.  
dent Hitchcock did not feel able to preach half of the time, as  
his predecessor had done, and so he and his clerical colleagues  
in the Faculty, preached in rotation on the Sabbath, at the  
Thursday evening lecture, and, in times of unusual religious in-  
terest, on Sunday, Tuesday, and Friday evenings. They also  
took turns with him in presiding at the monthly Missionary  
Concert, and other occasional meetings, and the older Professors  
aided the President in inquiry meetings and other special meet-  
ings in revivals. Visits of the officers to the students at their  
rooms, for the sake of conversation on personal religion, were  
perhaps more frequent at this period than they ever were before  
or after, and were often attended with obvious good results.  
The writer remembers seasons of conversation and prayer of  
great interest in this revival, the scene of which was at the pri-  
vate rooms of individual students.  
 
ested in the religious welfare of the students, and put forth  
united efforts to promote it, Dr. Hitchcock was strongly im-  
pressed with the conviction that other agencies and influences,  
particularly those of pious parents, relatives and friends, were  
quite as powerful as any exerted in College ; and towards the  
close of the revival in 1846, he addressed a letter of inquiry to  
several of the parents and friends of those hopefully converted.  
Specimens of the answers may be seen in his " Reminiscences,"  
(pp. 170-7), and they reveal a remarkable correspondence, not  
to say a mysterious sympathy between the religious exercises of  
the converts and those of their parents and friends, which make  
ward Y. Garrett, Horace Taylor, John Laurens Spencer; by  
profession, William Cowper Dickinson, Samuel Mark Fletcher,  
Charles Vinal Spear, John Hawkes, Jr.  
 
" June 14. Received by letter, Rev. Jonas Colburn and Mrs.  
Mary B. Colburn ; by profession, John W. Belcher, William S.  
Clark, Samuel Fisk, Francis Holmes, Francis A. Howe, Robert  
D. Miller, Thomas Morong, Henry J. Patrick, Hanson L. Read,  
Edwin Clapp, John L. Emerson, Charles Hartwell, James B.  
Kimball, William B. Colburn, Evarts Cornelius Tyler, Felicia  
H. Emerson and Frances J. Emerson ; most of these being the  
fruits of an interesting revival of religion during the last spring.  
 
" June 16. By request of the Pastor, the Clerk prepared by  
examination, the following statistical statement to the general  
Association of Massachusetts : ' The whole number of members  
of this Church is sixty ; of these forty-four are students, and  
sixteen are members of the several families of the teachers and  
others that attend public worship on the Sabbath at the College  
Chapel. The removals since June 1, 1845, are eighteen, all by  
letters of dismission to other churches ; the additions since that  
date are by letter fourteen, and by profession twenty-seven."  
 
It will be seen from the above that less than half of the en-  
 
tire number of professors of religion in College belonged at this  
time to the College Church. This has always been true (with  
a varying percentage), much to the regret of the President and  
Professors arid in spite of all their exertions. The entire num-  
ber of converts in a revival never join the College Church, al-  
though a majority have usually done so.  
 
One of the converts in this revival, a good scholar then and  
a faithful minister now, writes : l " For the precious, sacred, sav-  
ing influences that were thrown about me then, I can never be  
grateful enough. I knew but little of the word of God, before  
my conversion, but I have found that I became well established  
in the Pauline, Augustinian, Edwardian Theology before I left  
the College, though I never saw the Assembly's Catechism till  
after I entered the Theological Seminary. Dr. Hitchcock was  
my lean ideal of a Christian man and scholar, before I had a  
Christian hope and when I was half inclined to skepticism. His  
revival. The following narrative is condensed from minutes  
taken at the time by one,' 2 then a member of the Senior class,  
whose share in its labors and blessings will be remembered by all  
who participated in it.  
 
" There was unusual religious feeling in the fall term (1849-50)  
especially at the close ; and Christians left with a disposition to  
pray much for a revival. A daily prayer-meeting had been es-  
tablished that term, which was soon recommenced in the winter.  
An extra Sabbath evening prayer-meeting of all the classes was  
also held, continued from the fall term. The officers of the  
College commenced the term with desires to secure a revival,  
and their preaching, especially Thursday evening, was intended  
to bear on that point. And many of the prayers in the Presi-  
dent's Monday evening social religious meeting indicated the  
same desire on the part of some of the students.  
 
" Feeling gradually increased each week up to the middle of  
 
ligious duties as a preparation to work for God in the revival.  
'"We expected much from the College Fast; to it we looked as  
our only hope. The day came with all its solemnity, and more  
solemn than ever ; for Prof. Peabody, our new, beloved teacher,  
lay dead in our midst. Tidings of the death of some former  
students tended further to arouse us. For a few days all seemed  
unavailing, and we feared there would be no good result. One  
student, however, was deeply serious (D. P. H.) ; his feeling  
was increased by the death of the Professor ; and the day after  
the funeral (March 2) at meeting, he asked the prayers of his  
class. Sunday he obtained hope. Rev. E. G. Swift, then of  
Northampton, preached that day, and with much power, espe-  
cially his sermon, ' Under the law.' Rev. E. Bliss, the mission-  
ary, preached the next Sabbath, March 10, the feeling increas-  
ing meanwhile amid unceasing efforts, most pointed appeals and  
fervent prayers. Then for a week, there was an awful sus-  
pense, much holding back and great discouragement, till we  
now were on the point of saying we hardly dared hope for any-  
thing more. Just then, March 16, one who had been serious  
(J. E. S.) indulged hope, and others soon followed, one, two,  
three and four a day for weeks with few interruptions.  
 
"Sunday, March 17, a sermon by Prof. Smith, 'Almost per-  
suaded to be a Christian,' had a mighty effect. There was  
preaching in the Rhetorical Room, Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday  
and Friday evenings, except that Tuesday was sometimes  
changed to a Conference. The Monday evening meeting at  
Dr. Hitchcock's, was changed to two an Inquiry meeting, and  
one for other persons, conducted by Prof. Tyler or Prof. Smith.  
The Inquiry meeting increased from ten to forty. The whole  
number of hopeful conversions among the students was thirty-  
one, and several individuals in the families, worshiping in the  
Chapel. At the opening of the term, ten in th*e Senior class  
were unconverted : of these, six indulged hope, a much larger  
proportion in the Freshman class ; in the Sophomore and Junior  
 
brighter daily. Converts held out well. One convert, who  
held the first place in scholarship and influence in the Junior  
class, 1 remarked that he thought a man could not have one  
right or noble feeling till he loved Christ. A member of the  
Senior class, who had not accepted the Orthodox view of a  
change of heart, and the need of salvation by Christ, was led  
to renounce his self-righteousness, to feel his sinfulness, and  
trust in Christ for pardon ; and the very points in which he  
had been the farthest from the truth before, were the points  
of which he now thought and spoke with the most love and  
earnestness.  
 
"A member of the Freshman class had once indulged hope  
and gone back, and in College was one of the most hardened  
opposers. He seldom attended meeting. He and a company of  
associates like himself, tried a game of cards to see whose lot it  
should be first to become a Christian. The lot fell on him. It  
revival to renounce his hope and fall back into darkness before  
the end of that term. But he was a chosen vessel, and has  
for many years been an able and useful preacher of the gospel,  
within sight of his boyhood's home, and of our Alma Mater. 2  
How some Christians in that class, did work for their fellows !  
They are working still. The workers then are the workers  
the gospel, in different States ; several are eminent in the law,  
and are good men ; some are Christian preachers, and others ac-  
tive members of the church in other honorable spheres. The  
revival neve* will be forgotten by any who were in it, for the  
still, calm and deep power which made some do what before  
they could not find it in their hearts to do."  
rians of their classes.  
 
2 Rev. J. M. Green, Class of '53. 8 Prof. CrowelL  
 
thirty-three persons who, together, presented themselves at the  
altar, almost filling the broad aisle, all in the bloom of youth,  
and who now, for the first time, dedicated themselves, by their  
own voluntary consecration, to the service of their Maker, Re-  
deemer and Sanctifier. This was on the 23d day of June, 1850  
a day long to be remembered, not only by the persons them-  
selves, and their youthful companions, not only by the numerous  
families whom they represented, and to whom it caused great  
joy, but doubtless to be remembered forever, as a day when  
there was joy in the presence of the angels of God, and of the  
redeemed in heaven.  
 
Of the one hundred and seventy-nine members of College at  
this time, one hundred and six were professors of religion at the  
beginning of the revival, so that about one-half of those who  
were not reckoned among the people of God at the beginning,  
were numbered with them at its close.  
 
The year 1853 is reckoned among our seasons of spiritual har-  
vest, although the religious interest was not so general or so  
deep, nor the ingathering so abundant as in some other revivals.  
 
And lest the emphasis which we have given to these seasons  
of revival should be misinterpreted, it should be here remarked,  
that the records of the church show what will also be remem-  
bered by alumni, and others who have worshiped with us, that  
at this period, as at others in our religious history, there were  
additions to the church by profession every year, and at almost  
every communion. Thus at the communion in April, 1849,  
just about a year before the great revival of 1850 eight per-  
sons, among the leading scholars and men of influence in their  
respective classes, three of them now distinguished educators in  
New England, made a public profession of their faith in Christ.  
At the communion, next preceding, in February, 1849, one per-  
son, then a member of the Sophomore class, stood up alone,  
and avouched the Lord to be his God thenceforth and forever.  
And these sentences of a letter written in September, 1870,  
from the shores of the Mediterranean, show what most im-  
pressed him on entering College, and what kind of influences  
brought him from a wilderness of error and unbelief, into the  
fold of Christ : " First impressions are lasting. And my first  
 
impressions of Amherst College have never left me. T arrived  
at the College about the middle of the fall term, in 1848. We,  
(H. and myself,) had come from Ohio by the way of Lake Erie  
and the Canal, and had seen not a little of rough and profane  
society on our journey. What we witnessed on entering the  
College, was such a contrast to all this, and indeed to all that  
we had been accustomed to in our own previous observation and  
experience, that it seemed as if we had passed into another  
world ! The solemn, cheerful and intellectual air of the Presi-  
dent and Professors at morning and evening prayers, and the  
religious tone, not of voice, but of heart and life, in the major-  
ity of the students, led me into a new train of thought, gave  
me new views, and made me ere long a new man." The Fresh-  
man, who was thus led to be a believer in Christ, the Sopho-  
more who thus stood up alone to declare himself on the Lord's  
side, is now the President of the Syrian College at Beirut,  
where he is leading on the combined assault of learning and  
the religion of Jesus Christ against Mohammedanism in its  
strongholds. In the same letter, he adds his testimony also to  
the power and genuineness of the revivals of religion in Am-  
herst College. " These revivals," he says, " stamped upon my  
mind the conviction that Amherst College believed in the reality  
of the religion of Christ. There was no diminution of the usual  
amount of study; hence the excitement for there was great  
excitement was rational, the hea*rt and the intellect moved on  
together. Twenty years have proved that those who then em-  
braced the truth, were sincere ; for they are found, many of  
them, to-day, in various parts of the world, spending their ma-  
turer years in preaching Christ."  
 
May such evermore be the impression on the minds of those  
who enter, and such the history of those who leave Amherst  
College ! And that it may be so, let frequent revivals of relig-  
ion be cherished and enjoyed by officers and students, and also  
additions be made to the church every year, and at every com-  
munion besides; even as thousands were sometimes gathered  
into the primitive church in a single day, while the Lord also  
added to the church daily, of such as would be saved.  
 
