CHAPTER XXIII.  
 
THE PRESENT TRUSTEES.  
 
SEVERAL of the Trustees who now compose the Corporation,  
have been among the most faithful friends and the most self-  
sacrificiiig servants of the College from very early times, and  
are not less worthy of a place in its history than those who have  
deceased or resigned their charge. At the same time, their ser-  
vices are better known to the writer of these pages, and the  
chief events of their lives can be easier ascertained by him than  
they can by the historian of the next half century. I shall,  
therefore, set down the leading facts in the lives of the present  
Trustees, at the hazard it may be of transcending somewhat the  
proper province of history, but not, I trust, of the expense of  
its truth and impartiality.  
 
Dr. Ebenezer Alden is now the oldest member of the Board,  
having been elected in the place of S. V. S. Wilder, Esq., in  
1841, and therefore having now been a Trustee over thirty  
years, thus ranking next to Dr. Vaill and Mr. Calhoun in the  
length of time during which he has held the trust. He was  
born in the South Precinct of Braintree, now Randolph, March  
17, 1788. Both on his father's and his mother's side, he is a  
lineal descendant l of John Alden, the Pilgrim, and the last  
.male survivor of the Mayflower. His father was a highly re-  
spected physician in Randolph. All his immediate ancestors,  
paternal and maternal, were Congregationalists and members  
of Congregational Churches, so that, as he playfully remarks,  
if he, " also a Congregationalist, is a little persistent in his at-  
tachment to old forms of faith and worship, it need occasion no  
 
1 Of the seventh generation on his father's side.  
 
surprise." Having prepared for College under the instruction  
of his pastor, Rev. Jonathan Strong, D. D., he entered Harvard  
College in 1804, and graduated with honor in 1808. In his  
Senior year, he attended the medical lectures given at the Col-  
lege by Doctors Waterhouse, Dexter and John Warren. On  
the Monday succeeding his graduation in July, 1808, he left his  
home for Hanover, N. H , where he arrived after a hard ride of  
three days on horseback, and placed himself under the instruc-  
" but he was unselfish in his aims, an ardent lover of liberty and  
a sincere Christian, and who will say that his anticipations in  
regard to the prosperity and usefulness of Amherst College  
have not been more than realized ? If such have been the first-  
fruits in the first half-century, what, at its close, will be the  
ripened harvest ? "  
 
Having spent three years under the direction of Dr. Smith,  
and received the degree of Doctor of Medicine, Dr. Alden pro-  
ceeded to Philadelphia to obtain the advantages of hospital  
practice and to attend the lectures of the celebrated Doctors  
Rush, Wistar, Physic, Barton, James, and others. Returning to  
Massachusetts in 1812, he commenced the practice of medicine  
in his native town, where, in the eighty-fifth year of his age, he  
still resides in the enjoyment of a fair share of bodily health  
and strength, and where, for threescore years, he has stood  
among the foremost in his profession. He is a member of sev-  
eral of the most important Medical Societies, County, State and  
National, in some of which he has held the highest offices. He  
has a partiality, not to say a passion, for genealogical and his-  
torical inquiries, and is a member of the New England Genea-  
logical Society, of the American Antiquarian Society, and of  
the American Statistical Association. He has long been a cor-  
porate member of the American Board of Commissioners for  
 
He became early interested in the Temperance Reform, and  
it was by this means that he became interested in, and con-  
nected with Amherst College. He gives the following account  
of his first visit to Amherst in a letter which lies before me, and  
from which I have already taken one or two extracts : " I had  
the honor of an appointment to address the Antivenenian Soci-  
ety of Amherst College on the 24th of August, 1831. The  
meeting was held in the College Chapel before the removal of the  
old ' tub pulpit,' so called, the appearance of which will never  
be forgotten by the graduates of that day. Between Novem-  
ber, 1829, and February, 1834, I had occasion to deliver fifty-  
two lectures on temperance in all sorts of pulpits, but never in  
any one like this which, for all the world, resembled the bowl  
of a monster tobacco pipe, rather than a rostrum for public speak-  
ing.* The Doctor adds that he " still continues a teetotaler,  
and enjoys perhaps as good health as if he had addicted himself  
to the use of intoxicating beverages." While on his way to at-  
tend a meeting of the Trustees of Amherst College some twenty-  
five years ago, he lost an eye by a stage accident which occurred  
in consequence of the too free use of liquor obtained by the  
driver of the coach at a tavern on the route ; and he has ever  
since used this fact of his own experience as an argument pal-  
pable to the senses against licensing public houses to sell in-  
toxicating drinks.  
 
Dr. Alden has been a Trustee of Phillips Academy and the  
Theological Seminary at Andover even longer than of Amherst  
College ; and he has seldom been absent from the regular sessions  
of either Board. While his practical wisdom and his decision  
of character have given him a wide and happy influence in all  
the deliberations of the Trustees, his bibliographical tastes and  
his professional experience have enabled him to render services  
of especial value to the Library and the Gymnasium, and his  
steadfast zeal for the faith and practice of the Pilgrim Fathers  
have made him a watchful guardian of the religious character of  
the Institution. Among the many good things which Dr. Alden  
has done for Amherst, not the least is the education of two sons  
here, one in the Class of '39, and the other in that of '44, both of  
 
Next to Dr. Alden, Hon. Samuel Williston is the oldest living  
member of the Board and has been for the longest time a mem-  
der of seniority. He was born in Northampton, October 22,  
1798. His father, Col. William Edwards, was a grandson of  
the first President Edwards. His mother, Rebecca Tappan, was,  
the daughter of Benjamin Tappan of Northampton, and the  
sister of Senator Tappan of Ohio, of Arthur and Lewis Tap-  
pan, the well known pioneers of emancipation, and of John  
Tappan the philanthropist and friend of Amherst College.  
 
Educated in the schools of Northampton, trained and em-  
ployed in the store of his uncle Lewis Tappan in Boston from  
1813 to 1821, in 1821 and 1822 a clerk in Arthur Tappan's store  
in New York, in 1823, Mr. Henry Edwards commenced the im-  
porting business in State street, Boston, with his cousin, Charles  
Stoddard, under the firm of Edwards & Stoddard, in which he  
continued till 1846. From October, 1826 to July, 1831, he was  
a resident of France, for the purchase of goods, and was in Paris  
during the Revolution of 1830 which placed Louis Philippe on  
the throne. He enjoyed at that time the friendship of Gen.  
nine years a member in various ways of the city government of  
Boston, and ten years a Trustee of the Massachusetts General  
Hospital. In 1847 he was a member from Boston of the Massa-  
chusetts House of Representatives, and aided in securing the  
first grant made by the State to Amherst College. During  
the War of the Rebellion, appointed by President Lincoln, at  
the nomination of Gov. Andrew, Allotment Commissioner for  
Massachusetts, without pay, he visited most of the Massachu-  
setts Regiments, some before leaving the State, and others in  
the field, going usually on foot, and receiving so much of their  
pay as they desired to send home, conveyed or secured it to  
their families. During the service of the Commissioners, three  
 
families of Massachusetts soldiers without the expense or loss  
of a single dollar. By appointment of Gov. Andrew, he was  
Trustee for Massachusetts on the Board of the Soldiers' Na-  
tional Cemetery at Gettysburg. He was also appointed by Gov.  
Bullock to the same office and trust in reference to the National  
Cemetery at Antietam.  
 
Mr. Edwards has been a member of the Central Congrega-  
tional Church in Boston from its formation in 1835, and was  
chairman of the Building Committee in the erection of their  
new church edifice oif the Back Bay lands, which is one of the  
finest specimens of church architecture in New England.  
 
By his residence in Boston, by his wide acquaintance with  
men and things, and by his indefatigable zeal and industry, he  
has secured many a donation for Amherst College. During a  
trusteeship of twenty-eight years he has never been absent from  
a meeting of the Corporation, except under imperative necessity  
imposed by some other public duty ; and he has never spared  
time or toil in serving the College either in Boston or Amherst.  
 
Hon. Jonathan Cogswell Perkins, LL.D., was born Novem-  
ber 21, 1809, in that part of Ipswich called Chebacco Parish,  
now Essex, Mass., was prepared for College at Phillips Academy,  
Andover, and graduated at Amherst, with the second appoint-  
ment and the salutatory oration, in the same class with Judges  
Gibbon, Lord and Morris, the Class of '32. Having studied law  
in the offices of Leverett Saltonstall and Rufus Choate, then  
residing at Salem, and subsequently in the Law School at Cam-  
bridge, he was admitted to the bar in 1835. He was two years  
in the House of Representatives from Salem, viz., 1844-5 and  
1845-6. The next two years, viz., 1846-7 and 1847-8, he was  
a member of the Massachusetts Senate from Essex County. In  
June, 1848, while a member of the Senate, he was appointed  
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, and " proved himself to  
be a learned and able, as well as just and upright judge, com-  
manding alike the undivided confidence of the community and  
the profession." 1  
 
But the great life-work of Judge Perkins with which his  
name will go down to future ages, is that of editing with notes  
 
and references Pickering's Reports, Chitty's Criminal Laws,  
Chitty on Contracts, and numerous other standard works in  
his profession. His successive editions of these works have  
received the highest commendation from the best sources, and  
are recognized as authority in the courts. Hon. Charles Sum-  
ner says in reference to one of them : " The notes and references  
by Mr. Perkins place their author among American annotators,  
by the side of Story and Metcalf."  
 
Judge Perkins was chosen a Trustee of Amherst College by  
the Legislature, February 19, 1850, in the place of Gov. Arm-  
Mass., August 1, 1802, fitted for College at Sanderson Academy  
in his native place, and entered College in 1823, " when it was  
no College by charter, and when it had no President, Dr. Moore  
being dead, and Dr. Humphrey not yet appointed." He grad-  
uated in 1827, with the Philosophical Oration, Joseph S. Clark  
having the Valedictory and Timothy Dwight the Salutatory.  
These first three scholars of the class were all subsequently  
Tutors. The first year after his graduation, he taught in Am-  
herst Academy. The next two years he spent in the study of  
Theology, entering on his tutorship, however, in the spring of  
1830, and continuing in it till the autumn of 1831, when he  
returned to Andover and completed his theological course in  
1832. In the spring of 1832 he was licensed to preach by the  
Suffolk Association in Boston. On the 24th of October, 1833,  
he was ordained and installed pastor of the Congregational  
Church in Holden, where he still remains. Dr. Paine has been  
longer pastor of one and the same church than any Congrega-  
tional minister in Massachusetts now holding the office without  
a colleague. The result of this long connection and mutual in-  
fluence the pastor acting on the people and the people re-  
acting on the pastor is, as nearly as that ideal is often realized  
in this imperfect world, a model pastor and a model people. In  
1856, Amherst conferred on him the honorary degree of Doctor  
of Divinity. Since 1854, he has been a member of the Corpo-  
 
reunions has made him always watchful of the health and  
happiness of Alma Mater and the well-being of her children.  
During the half-century of her existence, there have been  
scarcely half a dozen Commencements which he has not at-  
tended. Amherst has had no more affectionate son, no more  
faithful friend, no wiser or truer guardian than Dr. Paine.  
 
Hon. Henry Morris, LL.D., was born in Springfield, June 16,  
1814, and Springfield has always been his place of residence.  
Having graduated with honor in the Class of '32, a class which  
has furnished four judges, two members of Congress, and two  
Trustees of Alma Mater, he studied law, partly at the Cam-  
bridge Law School, but chiefly in the office of his father, the  
late Oliver B. Morris, and, in October, 1835, was admitted to  
the bar and commenced the practice of his profession in his  
native place. In the years 1846 and 1847, he represented  
Springfield in the lower branch of the State Legislature and  
aided in procuring the first grant from the State to the College.  
When Springfield was made a city in 1852, he was the first  
President of the Council, which office he held for two years.  
 
In the autumn of 1854, Mr. Morris was elected a member of  
Congress. Before the time arrived for taking his seat, he was  
tendered by the Governor of the State the position of Judge  
of the Court of Common Pleas, and this being more in accord-  
ance with his tastes and habits, he resigned his seat in Congress  
and accepted the judicial office. In 1857, the Legislature abol-  
ished the Court of Common Pleas, and his judicial services hav-  
ing thus terminated, he returned to the practice of his profes-  
sion in which he still continues.  
 
Becoming a member of the College Church by profession in  
his Junior year, after graduating he transferred his relation to  
the First Church in Springfield, of which he is still a member,  
and for a few years past has been an officer.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Board in 1854, Judge Morris  
was elected a member of the Corporation in place of Mr. John  
Tappan. In 1869, he received the honorary degree of Doctor  
of Laws from his Alma Mater at the same time with his class-  
mate and co-Trustee, Judge Perkins.  
 
Hon. Alpheus Hardy came into official connection with Am-  
herst College soon after his intimate friend, Dr. Stearns, and  
doubtless at his recommendation, having been elected in the  
place of Gen. Mack in 1855, at the first annual meeting under  
the new presidency. He was born in Chatham, Mass., Novem-  
ber 1, 1815, and attended such schools as there were in his na-  
tive place, summer and winter, till he was twelve, when he  
entered his father's store, and in the winter till he was sixteen,  
when he went into a store in Boston.  
 
Compelled by a crushed foot to lie by, he went to Andover  
to spend a few months at Phillips Academy, and becoming in-  
terested, started on a course of study for College, but was ar-  
rested in June, 1834, by a severe sickness brought on by too  
close application. After spending three months at sea, he re-  
turned to Boston, and at nineteen years of age commenced busi-  
ness on his own account, which he still continues, "having sighted  
many a lee shore and shaved many rocks," to borrow his own  
nautical phraseology, " but the keel of his business ship has never  
touched bottom."  
 
Besides his large and prosperous shipping and importing busi-  
ness, he has been employed in the administration of estates,  
no less than ten large inheritances having thus been entrusted  
to him, among others the immense Sears estate, together with  
the care of the orphan children. Between such responsibilities  
and numerous public trusts, such as those of Amherst College,  
Phillips Academy, and the Theological Seminary at Andover,  
and the American Board, of which he has long been not only  
a corporate member, but a leading member of the Prudential  
Committee, between these two classes of cares and trusts,  
labors and responsibilities, he .has almost worn himself out in  
the service of others. His knowledge and experience of busi-  
ness have been of incalculable value to Amherst College, and  
his annual examinations of the state of the treasury command  
the entire confidence of the public as well as the Trustees and  
friends of the Institution. At the same time, his constant asso-  
ciation with educated men, particularly clergymen, 1 in which he  
 
1 Besides President Stearns, his pastor, Rev. William M. Rogers, was among his  
intimate friends and associates.  
 
sometimes claims to have enjoyed " the benefit of clergy," to-  
gether with the culture of society and travel, has qualified him,  
although himself without a college education, to stand up among  
the foremost graduates, whether in the discussions of the Board  
or on public occasions. He has been three times in Europe,  
twice in Egypt and the East, including Sinai and Palestine. In  
1861, he was a member of the Massachusetts Senate, and sat in  
that exciting and anxious extra session in May which was caused  
by the war.  
 
Mr. Hardy joined by profession the Old South Church in An-  
April 30, 1820. His father, Timothy Dwight, Esq., was the  
son of President Dwight of Yale College. His mother, Clarissa  
Strong, was the daughter of Gov. Strong of Northampton. He  
prepared for College in the Hopkins Grammar School in New  
Haven, graduated at Yale College in 1838, and from the Yale  
Theological Seminary in 1843. He was licensed by the Wor-  
cester North Association in 1842, and ordained pastor of the  
First Church in Saco, Me., December 25, 1844. In August,  
1853, he took charge of the First Church in Amherst, over  
which he was installed July 19, 1854, and remained pastor till  
1860, when the sickness of his wife rendered it necessary for  
him to ask a dismission. On the 27th of September, 1864, he  
was installed over the Russell Church in Haclley, of which he  
is now the pastor, and to which he has just had the pleasure,  
(May, 1872,) of receiving a large addition of members, the fruit  
has been Secretary of the Board, and coming generations will  
see in the Secretary's books of this period an index and image  
of the neatness, propriety and faithfulness with which he per-  
forms all his duties.  
 
Dr. Nathan Allen was born in Princeton, Mass., April 25,  
 
in the Corporation. Having received the degree of Doctor of  
Medicine from the Pennsylvania Medical College in Philadel-  
phia in 1836, he established himself soon after as a physician  
in Lowell, where he still continues in the successful practice of  
his profession. By his varied services as City Physician, School  
Committee, President of the principal Savings Bank, Member  
of the City Council, etc., besides his long and extensive medical  
practice, he has become almost incorporated with the social and  
civil history of Lowell. By his active connection with the First  
Congregational Church, his superintendence of a large Sab-  
bath School for ten years, and his frequent attendance of Church  
Conferences and Sabbath School Conventions, he is equally  
identified with the religious history of the city and the neigh-  
boring towns. He holds from the State a Justice's Commission,  
ous pamphlets, articles in Medical and Physiological Journals,  
and papers read at meetings of Medical Societies and organiza-  
tions for Social Science, on the Physiological Laws of Human  
Increase, the Intermarriage of Relations, Physical Degeneracy,  
Lessons on Population, the Effects of Alcohol and Opium, and  
kindred topics, which have had an extensive circulation in Eng-  
land, l as well as in this country, and have awakened a new inter-  
est, if not taught new doctrines of great importance on some of  
the most fundamental questions of our times.  
 
Chosen a member of the Corporation by the Legislature,  
February 20, 1837, in the place of Hon. Linus Child, Dr. Allen  
has rarely, if ever, been absent from the meetings of the Board ;  
and to his personal interest and his professional watch and care  
more than to any other Trustee, more than to any other man  
except Dr. Hitchcock, the Professor of the Department, the  
College is indebted for the success of the Gymnasium and the  
Physical Culture which it represents.  
 
Hon. Edward Bates Gillett was chosen a member of the Cor-  
poration by the Legislature, March 9, 1861, in place of Hon.  
 
1 1 found the Captain of the English steamer in which I crossed the Atlantic in  
1869, well posted with statistics derived from Dr. Allen's publications.  
 
George Grennell. He was born at South Hadley Fulls, August  
24, 1818, fitted for College at Hadley and Westfield Academies,  
and graduated at Amherst in 1839 in the same class with his  
fellow-Trustee, Dr. Storrs, with Bishop Huntington, of the Dio-  
cese of New York, and with that lover of Athens and of Athenian  
culture whose gifts so adorn our Greek recitation room, Mr. H.  
G. De Forest, all of whom are among his most intimate friends,  
as they have also all shown themselves to be among the warm-  
est friends of the College. Having studied law in Northampton,  
at the Cambridge Law School, and in Westfield, he opened a  
law office in the last mentioned place and commenced the prac-  
tice of his profession there in 1843.  
 
In 1852, he was elected a member of the Massachusetts Senate.  
In 1856^he was chosen District Attorney for the Western Dis-  
trict of Massachusetts, which office he continued to hold for  
fifteen years. Having resumed his ordinary law business in  
1871, he now has a wide practice and stands among the foremost  
in his profession, being not only a well read lawyer and much  
consulted as a wise counselor, but having great influence with a  
jury, partly through the confidence inspired by his character,  
and partly by the artless, familiar, friendly way in which, with-  
out any apparent effort to convince or persuade them, he talks  
them into sympathy with his cause. For similar reasons he has  
exerted no inconsiderable influence on the Legislature, not only  
while he was a Senator, but since his retirement from public  
office. More than once has he urged upon legislative Commit-  
tees the claims of Amherst College, and the College has gained  
reputation, if not pecuniary aid, through his advocacy. He has  
been much employed as the advocate and representative of rail-  
road corporations, and among others is now Attorney and Direc-  
tor of the Boston and Albany road. Numerous trusts at home  
and abroad such as the presidency of a Bank and an Insurance  
Company in Westfield, the trusteeship of Smith College at  
Northampton, and membership of the Massachusetts Board of  
Education show the estimation in which he is held for wisdom  
and integrity. Yet with all these demands on his time, no Trus-  
tee of Amherst has been more constant in attendance at the  
 
mands for extra time and service wherever, whenever and how-  
ever anything can be done to promote the welfare of his Alma  
Mater.  
 
Mr. Gillett has been for thirty years an active, and much of  
the time a leading member of the First Congregational Church  
in Westfield; and he is a wise and watchful guardian of the  
Christian character as well as the literary and financial interests  
of Amherst College.  
 
Rev. Lewis Sabin, D. D., was born in Wilbraham, Mass., April  
9, 1807, removed with his father to Belchertown at the age of  
seven, made a public profession of religion at the age of eleven ;  
fitted for College, partly under the direction of Hon. Myron  
Lawrence of Belchertown, partly under Rev. John A. Nash in  
Hopkins Academy, Hadley, and graduated at Amherst College  
in 1831 with the highest honors of one of our largest and best  
classes. For four years after his graduation he was principal of  
Hopkins Academy, then a flourishing institution which annually  
sent many young, men to Amherst, some of whom are among  
the most honored names on our Triennial. At the same time he  
was pursuing theological studies under the direction of Rev.  
John Brown, D. D., and during a part of the year 1832-3, at  
the Theological Seminary in Andover. Licensed in August,  
1835, and ordained, June 6, 1836, after laboring about a year as  
a missionary in Canada, on the 21st of September, 1837, he was  
installed pastor of the Trinitarian Church in Templeton, Mass.,  
where he has remained now almost thirty-five years, blessed in  
his work, beloved by his people, honored in the neighboring  
churches, presiding at ecclesiastical councils, publishing occa-  
sional sermons, touching the secret springs of influence, an ex-  
ample, the more remarkable, because so rare in these days, of  
such country pastors as once abounded in New England, and of  
whom so many were found among the early Trustees of Amherst  
College.  
 
In 1857, Alma Mater conferred on him the honorary degree  
of Doctor of Divinity, and in 1862 he was chosen a member of  
the Corporation, whose meetings he always attends, being one of  
those men who never accept a trust without faithfully discharg-  
ing its duties. Besides all his other services to the College, he  
 
has laid a goodly number of students under great obligations by  
training them a few weeks or months at a time, in re rustica.  
Unfortunately for them, he has not, like father Gould of South-  
ampton and others, had daughters whom they could carry off  
by way of reprisal.  
 
Rev. Richard Salter Storrs, D. D., was born at Braintree, Mass.,  
1821. His father, grandfather and great-grandfather were all  
Congregational ministers, and the first two bore the same names  
in which the present representative of the family rejoices. His  
father, the venerable pastor of Braintree, who preached his half-  
century sermon more than ten years ago, and is still able to  
preach, has always been a warm friend of Amherst College. l  
Entering College when he was only fourteen, he was a boy in  
stature and a boy in his love of ease and pleasure till his Junior  
year, wnen for the first time he began to awake to a genuine  
love of those studies in which his strength has ever since lain,  
viz., classics, rhetoric and belles-lettres. He graduated with  
highly respectable standing in the Class of '39, of which Dr.  
Huntington was the Valedictorian, and of which some of the  
brightest ornaments, Bancroft, Miller, Palmer and others, died  
within a few years after their graduation. He then taught with  
marked success, for some years, in Monson Academy and Willis-  
ton Seminary. He studied law also, before the great questions  
of personal religion and his life-work were settled. At length  
he went to Andover where these questions were made clear  
to him, and where he completed the theological course in 1845.  
The same year he took charge of the Congregational Church  
at Brookline, Mass. In November, 1846, he accepted a call to  
the Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn, of which he is still  
pastor. Our readers need not be told that that church is the  
center, and its pastor the head-center of Congregationalism in  
" the City of Churches." Nor is his power confined to the pulpit  
or within the pale of the church, still less of any denomination.  
His influence is felt everywhere. The Brooklyn Historical So-  
ciety, with its Library and Museum, is his foster-child. Litera-  
ture, art, politics, morals, education and religion all feel his  
1  
 
1 Mrs. Billings of Conway, who might well be called one of the founders, was of  
the Storrs family.  
 
guiding and inspiring touch. He was one of the founders and  
first editors of The Independent. Many of his sermons, lectures  
and addresses have been given to the public through the press  
and are quoted as specimens of American eloquence, while his  
volume of Graham Lectures has taken its place in the standard  
English Literature of the nineteenth century. " From this gen-  
tleman," says one of our best authorities, 1 " from this gentleman  
in our judgment one of the first men of his day we look for  
still more fruit." As we write (May, 1872,) he has just returned  
home, after a year of needful rest, recreation and travel in  
Europe, to enter upon a new period of usefulness, we trust with  
a new lease of life and new stores of health and strength as  
well as enlarged resources of wisdom and influence. With all  
the weight of care, labor and responsibility that presses upon  
him, Dr. Storrs is a faithful attendant on the meetings of the  
Corporation ; and by his literary and aesthetic taste and broad  
culture, he has done not a little to infuse these elements into  
the education that is given at Amherst.  
 
Samuel Bowles, Esq., was born in Springfield, Mass., February  
9, 1826. The public schools of that city and the printing office  
of his father, Samuel Bowles, the founder of The Republican,  
were his only opportunities for early education. At the age of  
sixteen he entered his father's office as " boy of all work," and in  
1844, when he was eighteen, he persuaded his father to establish  
The Daily Republican, so that he was virtually the founder, as  
he has ever since been the editor of that paper. The Springfield  
Daily Republican is unquestionably the ablest, the most influen-  
tial, and the most successful provincial newspaper in America,  
if not in the world, and Mr. Bowles has made it such. And by  
his bold and independent conduct of this paper, free from the  
trammels of party or sect, he has contributed largely to the in-  
troduction of a new era in journalism. At the same time, with  
a tact for business scarcely inferior to his talent in journalism,  
he has built up one of the largest and most successful printing  
houses and binderies in New England. He is the author of  
several books " Across the Continent," " Our New West,"  
" The Switzerland of America " which have had a wide circu-  
 
lation and are recognized as authority in regard to that new and  
wide and strange world which lies between the Mississippi and  
the Pacific Ocean. The first of these volumes appeared first as  
letters in The Republican which were written while the author  
was traveling in company with Vice-President Colfax, then  
Speaker Colfax, and others, partly for the benefit of his paper,  
but chiefly for health and recreation. Besides his travels in the  
West, he has twice visited the Old World.  
 
Mr. Bowles was elected a Trustee of Amherst College by the  
Legislature, April 26, 1866, in place of his friend and fellow-  
citizen, Hon. William B. Calhoun. If the amendment of the  
Charter which was enacted at the last session, should be ac-  
cepted by the Corporation and by the Alumni, he will be the  
last Trustee thus elected. The members of the present Board,  
chosen by the Legislature, are Messrs. Williston, Perkins, Al-  
len, Gillett and Bowles. The Alnmni can hardly elect men  
Henry Ward Beecher, D. D., as he would be regularly written  
in the academic and ecclesiastical style was elected a Trustee  
at the first annual meeting after the election of Mr. Bowles,  
(July 9, 1866,) in place of Rev. Dr. Ide 1 whether to offset the  
heterodoxy of the former or to replace the orthodoxy of the  
latter, is known only to those who elected him. He was born  
at Litchfield, Conn., June 24, 1813, where his father, Rev. Ly~  
man Beecher, D. D., was then pastor. He fitted for College at  
the Mount Pleasant Classical Institution in Amherst, entered  
Amherst College in 1831, and graduated in 1834. As Mr. Beecher  
sometimes exaggerates his deficiencies in College, and indolent  
students often fatten on them, it may be proper for one who  
knows, to say that while he was indifferent to mathematics and  
by no means enthusiastic in the study of the classics, he was  
both diligent and successful in Rhetoric and Oratory and Belles-  
 
sense, no student was ever more wide awake, industrious, tem-  
perate and faithful in the improvement of his time than Henry  
Ward Beecher was in College. His history, in brief, after leav-  
ing College, is as follows: studied theology with his father at  
Lane Seminary, Cincinnati ; settled as pastor of a Presbyterian  
Church in Lawrenceburg, Ind., in 1837 ; in 1839, removed to  
Indianapolis; in 1847, became pastor of the Plymouth Church  
in Brooklyn. His life since his settlement in the commercial  
metropolis, his pulpit eloquence and power over his own people,  
the influence of the Plymouth Church and pulpit on crowds of  
strangers who frequent it, his preaching by his printed sermons  
to tens of thousands every week, his editorial work in The Inde-  
pendent and The Christian Union, his books ("Lectures to Young  
Men," "Star Papers," "Life Thoughts," "Eyes and Ears,"  
"Norwood," "Life of Jesus the Christ," etc.,) his platform  
speeches on social, political, moral and philanthropic themes, his  
perpetual warfare against intemperance and slavery, his services  
to the country at home and abroad during the war all these  
are known to the intelligent, nay, known to the masses, through-  
out Christendom. Mr. Beecher loves Amherst, and revisits the  
place whenever he can. He is a warm friend of Amherst Col-  
lege, and attends the meetings of the Corporation as well as  
could be expected as often as his other innumerable and almost  
being chosen at the annual meeting in 1869 is Rev. Roswell  
Dwight Hitchcock, D. D. The brief epitome of his busy and  
fruitful life, which alone can be given here, is as follows: Born  
in East Machias, Me., August 15, 1817 ; l fitted for College at  
Washington Academy in his native town, entered the Sophomore  
class in Amherst College in 1833, at the age of sixteen, and grad-  
uated with high honor in the same class with William Bradford  
Homer, Alexander H. Bullock, Nathan Allen, Samuel C. Da-  
mon, Charles H. Doolittle, Alfred B. Ely, Ensign H. Kellogg,  
Loyal C. Kellogg, Stewart Robinson, and others now well known  
 
1 Prof. K. D. Hitchcock's father was of the same stock as President Hitchcock.  
 
to the public. Moved by the memories suggested by these  
names, the writer can not but pause to record the satisfaction  
with which when their Tutor, he used day after day to listen to  
the recitations of this class, and to none with more satisfaction  
than those of Hitchcock whose clear thoughts and nicely chis-  
elled words then foreshadowed the matchless perfection of his  
language now, thus illustrating the truth so often verified in the  
history of College graduates: "the boy is father to the man."  
Our epitome now goes on chronologically thus : In 1838-9, a  
member of the Theological Seminary at Andover ; 1839-42,  
teacher for one term in Phillips' Academy, Andover, and then  
Tutor in Amherst College ; 1842-4, resident Licentiate at An-  
dover; November 29, 1845, ordained and installed pastor of a  
Congregational Church in Exeter, N. H. ; 1847-8, without being  
dismissed, spent a year of study in Germany; 1852, succeeded  
Dr. Stowe as Collins Professor of Natural and Revealed Re-  
ligion in Bowdoin College; and in 1855, succeeded Prof. Henry  
B. Smith as Washburn Professor of Church History in Union  
Theological Seminary, New York City, which position he still  
holds ; received the degree of Doctor of Divinity from Bowdoin  
on leaving that Institution ; visited Italy and Greece in 1866,  
and in 1869-70, Egypt, Sinai and Palestine. While Professor  
in Union Theological Seminary, Dr. Hitchcock has been in con-  
stant demand, in the absence of pastors, to supply the principal  
pulpits in New York, Brooklyn and Boston, among others that  
of Mr. Beecher when he was in Europe. Nor has he been less  
popular, especially during and since the war, as a speaker on the  
platform, on subjects and occasions of the deepest public interest.  
His " Analysis of the Bible " is but the first fruits of a rich  
harvest of works in Church History and collateral subjects  
which he is preparing for the press. During the three year's of  
his official connection with Amherst College no Trustee has given  
it more time and thought and loving service ; and being the only  
Professor, the only educator in the Board, his service possesses  
a rare value which is highly appreciated by officers and students.  
 
