CHAPTER XXII.  
 
TRUSTEES AND OTHER OFFICERS DECEASED OR RESIGNED  
UNDER THE PRESIDENCY OF DR. STEARNS.  
 
THROUGH the remarkable providence of God, no member of  
the Faculty has died in office during the sixteen years of Dr.  
Steajns' presidency, and only three have deceased who during  
this period have been connected with the Faculty.  
 
Tutor Edwin Dimock, of the Class of '54, was Tutor here  
only one year, (1856-7). He was an accurate scholar and a  
good teacher. Ordained and installed pastor of the church in  
Orange, Mass., in 1858, he had been in the pastoral office only  
a short time, when, by hard study and faithful labor, he brought  
on him an attack of erysipelas in the head which necessitated his  
asking a dismission. Ill health followed him the remainder of  
his life, and he died in Colorado, November 3, 1865, at the age  
of thirty-seven.  
 
Dr. Newton S. Manross, who has been mentioned in a former  
chapter as taking the place of Prof. Clark during the first year  
of his absence in the war, was a man of great promise in science  
and rare nobility of character. A great favorite with officers  
and students, he stood up boldly for the Christian faith, and  
used all his influence for the highest good of the students and  
the prosperity of the Institution. Soon after leaving Amherst,  
he raised a company of volunteers in his native place, Bristol,  
Conn., was chosen their captain, and fell at Antietam at the very  
commencement of the battle, animating and leading them on to  
the bloody conflict.  
 
Mr. A. B. Kittredge, of the Class of '69, remained in Amherst  
 
training and drilling the lower classes in the former, where he  
had been captain of his own class through the course, and in  
the latter labeling anew the collections. With a genuine love  
of science he united a rare love of Christ and the souls of men  
which made his influence in College, whether as a student or an  
instructor, a positive Christian influence, and which impelled  
him strongly to the life of a missionary. But just before the  
close of the year, he was taken with bleeding at the lungs, and  
going home to his father's house, died of quick consumption be-  
fore he had entered on what he contemplated as his life's work,  
but having already accomplished much, and lived a long life,  
College, during the presidency of Dr. Stearns, viz : Hon. Linus  
Child, Hon. George Grennell, Rev. Jacob Ide, and Rev. Jonathan  
Leavitt, by resignation ; Rev. Joseph S. Clark, Hon. William B.  
Calhoun, and Rev. Joseph Vaill, by death.  
 
Hon. Linus Child was elected a member of the Corporation  
by the Legislature, January 31, 1844, in place of Hon. Samuel  
C. Allen, deceased, and resigned his trust at the annual meeting  
in August, 1856, having been a member during the entire presi-  
dency of Dr. Hitchcock and two years of the presidency of Dr.  
Stearns. He was born in Woodstock. Conn., February 27, 1802,  
pursued his preparatory studies partly with Rev. Samuel Backus  
of North Woodstock, and partly at Bacon Academy in Col-  
chester, graduated at Yale College in 1824, immediately after  
entered the Law School at New Haven, was admitted to the  
bar in Connecticut in 1826, and in 1827 commenced the practice  
of law in Southbridge, Mass., where he was married in 1830,  
and became a member of the Congregational Church in 1841.  
In 1845, he withdrew from the practice of the law in order to  
take charge of the Boott Manufacturing Company's business at  
Lowell, in which he continued seventeen years. In 1862, he  
 
utterances, and partly because he tried, as a rule, only those  
cases in which he believed himself to have espoused the right."  
 
While he was engaged in the practice of the law at Stur-  
bridge, he was six times elected a member of the Massachusetts  
Senate, and as chairman of the committee on railroads, he did  
much to shape the charters and the laws of these institutions  
which have almost revolutionized our habits of business and of  
life.  
 
At Lowell, he served in the Board of Aldermen in 1847, in  
the Common Council in 1851, as a member of the School Com-  
mittee in 1859 and 1860, and was always a prominent man, not  
only in business but in political and religious affairs. He was a  
teacher in the Sabbath school, both in Lowell and in Boston,  
andj"elt such a watchful and lively interest in the personal as  
well as the religious welfare of his pupils that he was virtually  
the pastor of his class. At Lowell, he had also a Bible class  
of young men, with an average attendance of at least fifty ; and  
his pastor, Rev. Mr. Jenkins, says : "It was a great pleasure to  
go into it as I often did, and listen to his explanations of God's  
word, his answers to questions, and his faithful and affectionate  
persuasions." For thirty years he was a pillar in the church,  
constant and helpful at all the meetings, instructive and per-  
suasive in religious addresses beyond most ministers, with the  
advantage of not being regarded as speaking professionally, in  
short, as one of his pastors says, one of those described by Paul :  
" Fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a  
comfort unto me."  
 
A corporate member of the American Board of Foreign Mis-  
sions for a quarter of a century, eleven years a member of the  
Prudential Committee and during all that time the unpaid legal  
adviser of the Board ; the Secretaries looked to him for wise  
counsel and leaned on him as a firm support, and none who dur-  
ing this period were accustomed to attend the annual meetings  
of the Board, will forget his commanding presence, or the wis-  
dom and weight of his remarks when he participated in the  
discussions.  
 
Mr. Child was a Trustee of Phillips Academy and the The-  
 
Indeed he was one of those wise counselors whose advice and  
influence are sought by all who know them, and the only limit  
to the number of their public trusts is their ability to bear them.  
It was on this ground, and not for any want of interest in the  
College, that he resigned his trust at Amherst fourteen years  
before his death. His counsel and influence, invaluable at all  
times, were especially useful in those plans and efforts, soon  
after Dr. Hitchcock came into the presidency, which turned the  
tide of popular feeling in favor of the College, and established  
it for the first time on a firm pecuniary foundation. The Trus-  
tees accepted his resignation with a vote of thanks " for the  
warm interest he had ever manifested in the prosperity of the  
College and for his efficient and very acceptable efforts in its be-  
half." Dr. Hitchcock, in his " Reminiscences," says of him : " He  
was for twelve years a wise and trusty counselor and advocate  
of the College. He was ever prompt to attend the meetings of  
the Board and to second efforts in intervals between the meet-  
ings for obtaining funds and for other purposes, and as he  
came into the Board in its darkest day, he had abundant oppor-  
tunity to show his fidelity to a cause which was then unpopular."  
Hon. George Grennell, also, was one of those excellent men  
whom the Legislature of the State has given to the corporation  
of Amherst College. He was elected Trustee in place of Hon.  
James Fowler, February 27, 1839, and after more than twenty  
years of devoted service reluctantly resigned his trust in 1859,  
because the summer session of the court of which lie was clerk,  
being regularly held the same week with the Commencement  
exercises, made it impossible for him to attend the annual meet-  
ing of the Board. He was born in Greenfield, Mass., Decem-  
ber 25, 1786. After a course of preparatory study at home and  
in Deerfield Academy, he entered Dartmouth College, and  
graduated in 1808 with the highest honors of his class. He  
studied law in Greenfield and was admitted to the bar in 1811 ;  
was prosecuting attorney for Franklin County from 1820 to  
1828 ; a member of the State Senate from 1824 to 1827 ; and  
the representative of his district in Congress through five suc-  
cessive sessions, from 1829 to 1840. One of those public men,  
rare at that time and too few in every age, who unite political  
 
integrity with unswerving moral and Christian principle, he stood  
up for temperance and the observance of the Sabbath, attended  
church and the Congressional prayer-meeting, and was always  
known at Washington as a Christian law-maker and statesman.  
Taking an active and influential part in the political campaign  
Congregational Church in Greenfield, and for more than fifty  
years was one of its deacons, resigning that position only with  
the*feeling that while the church should have the benefit of his  
an existence. His speech before the convention in 1818, of  
which he was secretary, was the most brilliant speech of the oc-  
casion, and influenced the convention powerfully in favor of  
establishing the College, and locating it in Amherst. Though  
not then a Trustee, he sustained it by his vote and influence in  
the struggle for the charter. As a member of the corporation,  
again, he stood by it through all the years of financial embar-  
rassment which threatened its very existence, withdrawing from  
his official connection with it only when it was established on a  
firm foundation, and then resigning his trust only because he  
estimated its value and sacredness too highly to retain the office  
when circumstances forbade his discharging its duties. During  
the first six years of his Trusteeship, Mr. Grennell was also a  
member of the Prudential Committee and attended its meetings,  
at no small expense of time and toil, as often as other duties  
would permit. The records of the Trustees show that he was  
also very frequently placed upon those special committees, both  
financial and literary, on which the most laborious and responsi-  
ble duties were devolved.  
 
Mr. Grennell is still living, in the eighty-sixth year of his  
 
patriarch not only of a numerous and happy family of children  
and grandchildren, but of the church of which, for half a cent-  
ury he was an officer and is still an active member, and of the  
county of whose civil, political and religious interests he has so  
long been the leader and representative.  
 
Rev. Joseph Sylvester Clark, D. D., of the Class of '27, was  
elected a Trustee at the annual meeting of the corporation in  
August, 1852, to fill the vacancy created by the death of his  
friend, Prof. B. B. Edwards. As Prof. Edwards was the first,  
so Dr. Clark was the second, alumnus chosen by the Trustees  
themselves to this office. Judge Perkins of the Class of '32,  
became a member of the Board in 1850, but he was elected by  
the Legislature.  
 
The following is a brief summary of the principal facts in the  
life of Dr. Clark with their dates :  
 
Born December 19, 1800, at Manomet Ponds, Plymouth,  
Mass., entered Amherst Academy, July, 1822, and Amherst Col-  
lege, September, 1823 ; graduated at Amherst in 1827 and en-  
tered Andover Theological Seminary the same year; Tutor at  
Amherst, 1828-9; completed the course at Andover in 1831;  
ordained and installed pastor of the Congregational Church in  
Sturbridge, Mass., December 21, 1831, where he remained seven  
years ; secretary of the Massachusetts Home Missionary Society  
eighteen years, (1839-1857) ; secretary of the Congregational  
Library Association eight years, (1853-1861) ; died at Ply-  
mouth, August 17, 1861, in the sixty-first year of his age.  
 
Prof. Park who was his classmate at Andover, and who wrote  
the biographical sketch of Dr. Clark in The Congregational Quar-  
terly, has preserved interesting traits and recollections of his  
College and Seminary life. The following extract from his  
" day-book " of expenses in 1823, when he entered College, is  
College, and bought bowl, spoon, knife and fork, with one-half  
 
dozen crackers, . . . . , $0 31  
 
He graduated with the highest honors of his class. The sub-  
ject of his Valedictory Oration was, " The Responsibilities of  
Literary Men." The Master's Oration at the same Commence-  
ment was delivered by Prof. Edwards. His classmate, and af-  
terwards fellow-tutor and fellow-trustee, Dr. Paine, says :  
 
" He was exceedingly methodical and minute in all plans and  
details, and he then foreshadowed what he has since exhibited,  
a remarkable .skill in historical and statistical investigations.  
He was made the Class Secretary, and continued to hold this  
office until his death." He was also the Secretary of the So-  
ancTlarge additions to the church. One hundred and thirteen  
were admitted to it during the first year of his ministry, twenty-  
two during the second year, twelve in the third, twelve in the  
fourth, forty-nine in the fifth, and fourteen in the sixth.  
 
He left his people and the pastoral office with impaired health  
to enter, after only a few months' rest, the secretaryship of the  
Massachusetts Home Missionary Society, which was the great  
work of his life. His own early history, his religious experi-  
ence, his labors as a lay-missionary while in College and the  
Theological Seminary, his pastoral work all his antecedents,  
not less than his personal habits and characteristics fitted him  
peculiarly for this office. He gained the confidence of the  
feeble churches, nay, their grateful and affectionate veneration.  
The home missionaries loved him as their brother, and honored  
him as their father. He had the confidence also of the wealth-  
ier churches and their pastors, and knew the way to their purses  
as well as to their hearts. He left the Massachusetts Home  
Missionary Society a power in the land, and performed a work  
not only for the feeble churches of Massachusetts but for home  
missions which, as Prof. Park says, " could have been performed  
by very few persons."  
 
From this he passed naturally and gradually into the new and  
more difficult enterprise of the Congregational Library Asso-  
ciation. His intimate acquaintance with the Congregational  
churches of New England and the West impressed strongly on  
 
his mind the conviction that they needed a bond of union, a  
centre of attraction and more esprit du corps. At the same  
time the place of his birth and his admiration for the Pilgrims  
led him into full sympathy with any effort to recover and pre-  
serve the records of early New England history. He became  
the Corresponding Secretary of the Congregational Library As-  
sociation in 1853, and in 1857 resigned his connection with the  
Home Missionary Society in order to become its financial agent.  
The last four years of his life he devoted to cultivating public  
sentiment in favor of the objects of this society and soliciting  
funds for the erection of a memorial building worthy to com-  
memorate the Congregational Fathers, and suitable to hold the  
records of their faith. He was the architect, and, while he  
lived, the chief builder of that enterprise. " If any one .man  
formed the bone and sinew of the society," says Prof. Park,  
" that man was Dr. Clark." Under the auspices of this asso-  
ciation, The Congregational Quarterly was established in De-  
cember, 1858, of which he was senior editor until his death.  
 
Entering Amherst College in 1823, only two years after the  
opening, from that time he always cherished towards her a truly  
filial affection. Feeling it to be his duty and his privilege to  
transfer his relations, he became one of the earliest members of  
the College Church it was a disappointment and a trial to him  
that an unexpected delay in the arrival of his letter of dismis-  
sion, prevented his name from being enrolled among those who  
first constituted it.  
 
Only one year after his graduation, he was chosen Tutor. He  
succeeded Mr. B. B. Edwards in this office, as he afterwards did  
in that of Trustee. Mr. Snell and Mr. Edwards were the only  
alumni who had preceded him in the tutorship. Looking at  
him as a Tutor from the position not of a pupil but of an upper  
class man, and knowing him only as he appeared out of the rec-  
itation room, I always think of him as a Barnabas, " a son of  
 
(unity to do her service. In 1851, the Trustees conferred on  
him the degree of Doctor of Divinity. In 1852, they elected  
him a member of the Corporation. During the nine years of  
his connection with the Board, he was present at every meeting  
of the Trustees annual and special, two only excepted. " He  
was punctual and constant," says President Stearns, " in his at-  
tendance on the meetings of the Board ; a working man in the  
details of its business, and ready at all times to make personal  
sacrifices for the College. But few, if any, of its guardians, if  
I may judge from the records as well as in late years from my  
own observation, have originated more important measures, or  
carried them through with more success." l Prof. Park, with  
no less truth than point, says : " Dr. Clark, like Prof. Edwards,  
felt such a personal attachment to the College, that he loved to  
deny himself in its behalf. He was so whole-souled and free-  
hearted in his sacrifices for it, as to make the adage appear both  
false and strange that corporations have no souls. He may  
safely be called a model Trustee ; and his example is a rebuke  
to men who lend their bodies to a corporation, and leave their  
souls elevated and unincorporated." 2  
 
At the last meeting of the Trustees which he attended, in  
July, 1861, they, by recorded vote, placed at his disposal the  
manuscript of Dr. Humphrey, recently deceased, and all other  
documents of the kind, and requested him to prepare a history  
of the College, " to be given to the public under the supervision  
and direction of the corporation." Though in imperfect health,  
he began at once to sketch the plan and write a few notes of  
his history, but before the expiration of the next month, his  
work on earth had ceased. He helped not a little to make the  
history which he was so well qualified, but, alas ! was not per-  
mitted to write.  
 
Dr. Clark wrote much for the public and planned to write  
much more. Near the close of his pastorate, he published "An  
Historical Sketch of Sturbridge, Mass., from its first settlement  
to the present time." Shortly after retiring from the Home  
Missionary service, he published a volume entitled " A Histori-  
cal Sketch of the Congregational Churches of Massachusetts,  
 
1 See Biographical sketch in Congregational Quarterly, January, 1862. 2 Ibid.  
 
from 1620 to 1858." Copies of his unpublished official letters  
which he left in the archives of the Massachusetts Home Mis-  
sionary Society, fill seven quarto volumes. His connection with  
the Congregational Library Association was still more fruitful  
in suggestions and materials for the history of the churches.  
Only sixteen days before his death, he said to Prof. Park : " I  
am now ready to publish what I have been accumulating during  
the last twenty years. I desire to devote the rest of my life to  
the preparation of several volumes for which I have been col-  
lecting the materials." " When he went down to his grave,"  
adds the Professor, " he seems to have carried with him more  
knowledge of facts involved in the history of the Massachusetts  
churches than is possessed by any living man. His death is an  
irreparable loss to the cause of our ecclesiastical literature."  
 
Rev. Jacob Ide, D. D., was chosen a member of the Corpora-  
tion at their annual meeting in August, 1839, in the place of  
Rev. Joshua Crosby deceased, and resigned his trust at the an-  
nual meeting in July, 1863, having held the office almost a quar-  
ter of a century. A native of Attleboro, Mass., he graduated  
with high honor at Brown University in 1809, and finished his  
theological studies at Andover, in 1812, being a member of  
the second class that went through the entire course at that  
Seminary the class of those pioneers of American Missions,  
Mills and Richards and Warren. On the 2d of November,  
1814, he was ordained and installed pastor of the Second Con-  
gregational church in Medway, Mass., where he still remains, a  
rare and beautiful example of the New England pastor, grow-  
ing in wisdom, usefulness and honor as he advances in years,  
and still " dwells among his own people " and although he is  
settled in a small and obscure parish in the country, making  
his influence felt in morals, politics, education and religion  
through the land. Having put the finishing touch on his  
professional training by studying divinity under Dr. Emmons,  
and marrying his daughter, he preached the doctrines of the  
Christian system with the method, clearness and argumenta-  
tive force by which that divine was distinguished. And the  
fruits of such preaching, united with systematic instruction  
 
and Sabbath schools, and the use of other suitable means, were  
seen in the steady growth of the church in numbers, intelli-  
gence and piety, as well as in frequent special seasons of revival  
which brought in large additions to the church. In the summer  
of 1827, about one hundred were supposed to have become the  
subjects of Divine grace ; in 1857-8, there was an enlargement  
of the church by the addition of seventy members ; and the  
whole number received into the church during the first fifty  
years of his pastorate, was five hundred and sixteen, making an  
average of a fraction over ten each year. During the same time,  
he solemnized four hundred and thirty-two marriages, adminis-  
tered five hundred and ten baptisms, and attended seven hundred  
and forty-three funerals in his own parish, besides a large num-  
ber hx,neighboring towns. In his semi-centennial discourse, he  
says in his simple and naive style : " I have attended one hun-  
dred and seventy-five ecclesiastical councils, and been requested  
to attend ten more which my circumstances at the time would  
not allow. I have written, I can not say how many sermons.  
They are not numbered. Until very lately I have had no thought  
that the public would ever feel any interest in knowing the num-  
ber. And now, after having burnt some, and given away some,  
and torn up some, and printed about forty in pamphlet and in  
other forms, I can not say what their number is, and I don't  
know as I should wish to if I could. If they were seen I ap-  
prehend their number would be thought greater than their  
merit." Behold what a " work " is that of a New England  
country pastor, and at the same time what a harvest is his !  
Such, have been not a few of the Trustees of Amherst College.  
Dr. Ide has been a pioneer in the cause of Temperance, Anti-  
Slavery and Christian Missions. His daughter married Mr.  
Torrey who died in prison at Baltimore, one of the early martyrs  
in the cause of Abolition. The simple narrative which he has  
given in his semi-centennial discourse of his own fruitless efforts  
to obtain the release of that son-in-law is full of pathos, and  
reads strangely in our day : " I spent nearly two months in un-  
successful efforts to procure Mr. Torrey 's release from prison. I  
procured and caused to be sent to the Governor of Maryland, a  
petition to this end, bearing a long list of the names of distin-  
 
guished merchants and civilians, lawyers and judges, among  
whom was the name of the judge that sentenced him and also  
the names of the directors of the penitentiary where he was con-  
fined. I went myself in person to the Governor with a certifi-  
cate from the Surgeon of the prison that Mr. Torrey was in the  
last stages of a consumption, and could survive but a very short  
time. My plea was that as the penalty already inflicted was  
greater than the State originally intended, amounting in its ulti-  
mate effects to death, I might be permitted to take him home  
with me that he might die with his friends. The reply of the  
Governor was, ' I could with more safety release two or three  
murderers than one person guilty of abducting slaves.' I was  
obliged to leave the prisoner in the han'ds of His Excellency  
until death released him from his bonds."  
 
In the years 1830 and 1831, Dr. Ide was repeatedly solicited  
to accept the Professorship of Theology in the Seminary at Ban-  
gor. But between his modesty, his imperfect health and the ir-  
reconcilable opposition of his people, he declined the appoint-  
ment. For similar reasons he declined many other flattering  
invitations. " I have been invited to preach," he says, " before  
the Convention of Congregational Ministers of Massachusetts,  
before the General Association of Massachusetts, before the  
American Missionary Association, and twice before the Alumni  
of the Theological Seminary at Andover ; but on neither of  
these occasions have I been able to give a favorable response to  
the invitation."  
 
In 1838, he received the honorary degree of Doctor of Di-  
vinity from Brown University. In 1842 he published the works  
of Dr. Emmons in six octavo volumes and in 1850 added another  
volume ; in 1863, a new edition, enlarged and revised by Dr.  
Ide, was published by the Congregational Publication Society in  
six octavo volumes of more than eight hundred pages each, with  
a new and more extended memoir by Prof. Park.  
 
Dr. Ide's official connection with Amherst College began in  
the period of reaction and decline under President Humphrey  
and continued through the presidency of Dr. Hitchcock and  
nearly ten years of the presidency of Dr. Stearns, thus covering  
about one-half of the entire existence of the Institution. A  
 
steadfast friend and wise counselor in those most critical and  
eventful years in its history, he resigned his place only when  
the failure of his sense of hearing rendered him incapable, as he  
thought, of rendering further service in the meetings of the  
Board. In sending at my request the printed discourse to which  
I have more than once referred, he writes me : " I have only  
one thing that I am anxious to communicate to you that you  
will not be likely to gain frotn a perusal of this document, and  
that is, that I resigned my place as Trustee of the College only  
because I could not hear what passed in the body on account of  
my deafness. I was deeply interested in the affairs of the Insti-  
tution and highly pleased with the character and society of the  
gentlemen with whom I was associated. I wish it understood  
that I Tiad no other reason for leaving a body of men whom I  
Corporation at its first annual meeting under the presidency of  
Dr. Stearns in 1855, in place of Rev. Dr. Packard, and resigned  
the office, at the same time with Dr. Ide, in July, 1863. Not  
long after his election, his health began to decline, so as to  
render his attendance at the meetings of the Board irregular,  
and the same cause, after eight years, led to his resignation.  
He entered the first Freshman class in Amherst College in  
1821, graduated with the highest honors of his class in 1825,  
was chosen Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory in place of Prof.  
Fowler in 1844, but in deference to the urgent wishes of his  
people, declined the appointment, and received the honorary  
degree of Doctor of Divinity from his Alma Mater in 1858.  
He was a highly acceptable and useful pastor of the Richmond  
Street Church in Providence, R. I., until ill-health incapacitated  
him for that work as well as for the service of Amherst College.  
 
Hon. William B. Calhoun was a Trustee thirty-four years, a  
longer time than any other member of the Board, with the sin-  
gle exception of Dr. Vaill. He was chosen by the Legislature,  
June 10, 1829, to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of  
his townsman, Hon. John Hooker, and his connection with the  
 
William Barren Calhoun was born in Boston, December 29,  
1795. His father was a Scotch Presbyterian who came to this  
country from the north of Ireland in 1790 ; his mother was a  
New England Puritan ; and his early training, physical, mental,  
moral and religious, was such as might have been expected from  
such a parentage. He graduated at Yale College in 1814, sus-  
taining a high rank in the same class with Joshua Leavitt,  
Leonard Withington, Daniel Lord and Chief Justice Storrs.  
Coming to Springfield as a young lawyer, he soon commanded  
the respect and favor which he enjoyed there to so remarkable  
degree during his whole life. He was sent to the Legislature  
in 1825 and continued a Representative for ten years ; the last  
two years, he was Speaker of the House. From 1835 to 1843,  
he represented the district of Hampden and Hampshire Coun-  
ties in the Congress of the United States. Withdrawing from  
Congress in consequence of ill-health, he was elected to a place  
of high honor among the presidential electors who cast the  
vote of Massachusetts for Henry Clay in 1844. In 1846 and  
1847, the people of Hampden County who would not permit  
him to remain long in private life, sent him to the Massachusetts  
Senate, and in both years he was made President of that body.  
From this position he was transferred the next year to the office  
of Secretary of State, which he held for three years, till 1851.  
Hence he was driven by increasing ill-health to the retirement  
of a farm, from which, however, he was partially drawn as  
Commissioner of Banks, from 1853 to 1855, as Maj-or of Spring-  
field in 1859, and as Representative in the Legislature in 1861.  
The too brief remainder of his days was passed in an unavail-  
ing struggle with a combination of diseases, dyspepsia, catarrh,  
and consumption, of which he died at Springfield, November 8,  
1865, having almost reached the age of threescore years and  
ten, nearly half of which he had spent in various public offices,  
without a stain or a reproach upon his character, growing in the  
confidence of his constituents, and the affectionate regards of  
his neighbors and friends to the last. Like not a few of the  
statesmen and sages of antiquity, his integrity in the public ser-  
vice was attested by his poverty, for he lived a poor man and  
died leaving very little property. " We never knew him to seek  
 
an office," we quote from an appreciative obituary notice in The  
Springfield Republican, doubtless written by Mr. Bowles, "he  
yielded to the opportunities for it oftener than he would but  
that he was poor, and ill-health and disrelish unfitted him for  
the successful practice of his profession ; but we never could  
detect the slightest element of the demagogue or the office-  
seeker in his character or his manners. The atmosphere of his  
presence forbade any such ideas. He was consistently, radi-  
cally democratic in his thought and principles, as true a repub-  
lican as ever lived ; but his appearance and his manner were al-  
ways dignified, self-respecting, unimpassioned. When he spoke,  
particularly when he addressed a public audience, there was  
more of enthusiasm, and he was always earnest in conviction  
and utterance. In writing, too, his style was far more spirited,  
popular and enthusiastic than would have been imagined by  
those not familiar with this expression of his life. His style was  
pure, the purest, yet popular and enticing. It was both vigor-  
ous and effective, simple and elevated.  
 
" The one superior element in Mr. Calhoun's character and  
life was its high moral quality. It was this and the subtle rec-  
ognition of it that made him so strong with the people, that  
gave him such influence with them and such power in public  
places. We never knew a man more gifted in this respect ; it  
seemed an endowment of nature, indeed, more than a discipline  
of life it seemed as if he were born into and had always lived  
in it. His religious character grew out of this, and became in  
middle life, and since, a conspicuous and even dominating influ-  
ence with him. He was very much absorbed in religious and  
theological reading ; probably his library was the richest in these  
respects in all this region ; and the old Puritan habits and  
thoughts appeared to grow firm into his nature and experience."  
 
Mr. Calhoun was an active member of the First Congrega-  
tional Church in Springfield, and a deacon of the church at the  
time of his decease. Rev. H. M. Parsons, who was then pastor of  
the church, says in a sermon preached shortly after his death : x  
" The influence of such an ancestry who combined the solid  
strength of Scotch principle with the fervent devotion of Puri-  
 
1 Printed in The Springfield Republican.  
 
tan faith, is well illustrated in the life of oar friend. The Bible  
was early enshrined in his reverence, and destined to exert a  
commanding influence on his character. From earliest years he  
was noted for the serious cast of his mind. Before seven years  
old he had read in course the whole Scriptures and during his  
mature years they were his daily meditation. From their eter-  
nal facts and divine promises he drew strength and comfort,  
through a long decline of health, even to the moment of death."  
Mr. Calhoun's services to Amherst College were numerous  
and various, and they extended through the larger part of its  
entire history. Becoming a Trustee in 1829, he was for several  
years a member also of the Prudential Committee. In 1832, he  
left the Speaker's chair in the House of Representatives to ad-  
vocate the petition for pecuniary aid, and when the College and  
its officers were assailed in the same debate, he spoke again in  
vindication of its character and claims. From 1835 to 1848, his  
name appears on the Catalogue as Lecturer on Political Econ-  
omy ; and although imperfect health and many public engage-  
ments prevented his lecturing often or much, it was not for  
want of interest in the College or in political science, and the  
lectures which he did give, were rich in thought, lofty in senti-  
ment and beautiful in style. The charm of his wisdom and elo-  
quence still lingers in my memory, and I shall never forget his  
graphic portraiture of Jeanie Deans and his high and just ap-  
preciation of the economical value of such works of taste and  
imagination as " The Heart of Mid-Lothian." In his beautiful  
address at the Dedication of the Cabinet and Observatory in  
1848, he insists on the relations of Colleges and College Fac-  
ulties to Public Economy : " What a beautiful illustration is  
here [in Amherst College] of the true principles of a just Pub-  
lic Economy. The industry and skill and sagacity which have  
been faithfully and judiciously applied to the accumulation of  
private w r ealth, now pour back their varied generous contribu-  
tions for the improvement, the refinement and the adornment  
of that land which has been at once the scene and the witness  
 
tellectual not less than the material resources, of the commu-  
nity ? " This address is an earnest and eloquent plea for a sym-  
metrical education for the study of the classics and the Bible  
as well as the physical sciences, and all under the guidance of  
Christian principles and in a missionary spirit : " We can not  
dissever education and Christianity." " Remember the commis-  
sion : Gro ye into all the world. Improve the condition of man.  
Wherever there may be forlornness and sorrow, administer con-  
solation ; wherever depression and poverty, lend a helping hand ;  
wherever there is a sin, invade it, probe it, gently but effectu-  
ally ; wherever there is ignorance, enlighten it." These truly  
Christian utterances sound the key-note of the address. They  
express the sentiments even of the lay Trustees of Amherst  
Collegg. They indicate the character and spirit, the mind and  
heart of William B. Calhoun.  
 
Dr. Vaill needs no biography for any of the alumni of Am-  
herst College, scarcely for any of its friends or acquaintance of  
the present generation ; for they all know him ; not to know  
him were to prove themselves unknowing and unknown. Cho-  
sen a Trustee in 1821, four years before the College was incor-  
porated, and when that act was granted in 1825, appointed a  
member of the Corporation by the Legislature, he was several  
years the youngest member of the Board. Continuing to hold  
the office for almost half a century, he was known for many years  
as " the oldest member of the Board ;" so he often called him-  
self, and so he was often called by others ; it was a sort of sur-  
name or sobriquet as well understood and almost as familiar as  
his name with the honorary title which was inseparably associa-  
His father and his maternal grandfather were both ministers in  
Connecticut. His father, Rev. Joseph Vaill of Hadlyme, who  
for more than fifty years was pastor of the church in that place,  
was accustomed to take scholars into his family and prepare  
them for college. Rev. Dr. Griffin, Rev. Dr. Harvey, and Hon.  
William Hungerford were among his pupils. Having received  
 
entered Yale College in 1807,. and graduated in 1811, enjoying  
in a high degree the respect of his honored president, Dr.  
Dwight, and the esteem of his classmates, among whom were  
Roger Sherman Baldwin of Connecticut, Francis Granger of  
New York, Rev. Prof. Emerson of Andover, Rev. Dr. Spring  
of New York City, and Dr. Joseph E. Worcester the lexicog-  
rapher. Mr. Sidney E. Morse, the founder of the New York  
Observer and the father of the religious newspaper press, was  
not only his classmate but his roommate, and ever after his in-  
timate friend. The next year after his graduation he taught  
school in Litchfield, and in Salisbury, Conn. The following  
winter he studied theology with his father, and the next sum-  
mer he commenced preaching. After preaching in different  
places, in several of which he received invitations to settle, he  
was ordained pastor of the church in Brimfield, Mass., February  
2, 1814, his venerable father preaching the ordination sermon,  
and his brother, Rev. William F. Vaill, also taking part in the  
services. Mr. Vaill was then only twenty-three years of age.  
The whole town, with a population of sixteen hundred and only  
one religious organization in it, was his parish. There were  
less than seventy professors of religion, and scarcely a solitary  
young person in the whole church. Hurtful error was widely  
prevalent. Sound doctrine was offensive to many of his  
hearers. The spiritual condition of the people was as cold  
and dreary as the dilapidated, old-fashioned church edifice in  
which they assembled for worship on the Sabbath without any  
means of warming it in mid-winter; and many were bitterly  
hostile to any change in either. When the subject of introduc-  
ing stoves into the church was under discussion, one gentleman  
rose and said : " Fellow-citizens, we do not need a stove in this  
house to warm it up, the preaching is hot enough for that pur-  
pose." Such preaching was not long without manifest fruits.  
During the first four years of his ministry, years of compara-  
tive trial and hardship, as many had been received to the church  
as were members at the time of his settlement. In the autumn  
of 1818, a revival of great power the first general revival in  
the whole history of that church commenced which continued  
for more than a year and brought into the church at five succes-  
 
sive communions over a hundred souls. And from that time " a  
series of revivals were experienced, such as were never before  
witnessed on that ground, beginning in 1818 and continuing at  
not very distant intervals till 1834. These revivals brought into  
the church some hundreds of souls, produced a great change in  
derstand that in his prime he must have been a preacher of no  
ordinary power in times of revival ; for his preaching was al-  
ways direct, pungent, solemn, searching, eminently practical,  
highly evangelical, exhibiting in a clear and strong light the  
central truths of the gospel without any admixtures of human  
phifesophy, wielding " the sword of the Spirit, which is the word  
of God," naked, without anything to take off its edge or blunt  
its point. But those who knew him only in his later years can  
with difficulty realize the impression which he seems to have  
made as the revival preacher, " the Boanerges," " the burning  
and shining light " in the churches of the Brookfield Association  
in those early revivals. " He was the young America in that  
circle of pulpits," writes a native of North Brookfield who as-  
cribes his own conversion to the power of Mr. Vaill's preach-  
ing, and who is now himself an able and eloquent preacher of the  
Word. 2 "He touched feelings, gave point and poignancy to  
truth, as no contemporary did. If I am not quite mistaken, he  
was the minister of a new dispensation of pulpit power the hom-  
iletic versus the didactic, and, I fear I ought to say, the dog-  
matic forms. Fond as Dr. Snell's parishioners were of hearing  
him and sure as they were to say, ' after all none of the minis-  
ters quite come up to ours,' yet when Mr. Vaill came on ex-  
change, the town was moved. Everybody went that day who  
ever went at all. But his noonday was in the revivals of 1831.  
He was then about forty years old, and a noble prime was his.  
No man so swayed assemblies, and ' made fast the arrows of the  
Almighty' in the hearts of men as did he."  
 
1 Annals of the Church at Brimfield, by Rev. Jason Morse, an alumnus of the  
Class of '45, who succeeded Mr. Vaill in the pastorate of that church.  
 
After describing the sermon and the scene on that Sabbath  
afternoon when, Mr. Vaill having exchanged with Dr. Snell, the  
writer's own heart was pierced by an arrow from the preacher's  
quiver, he proceeds : " That assembly dispersed as few assem-  
blies ever do, so speechless, silent, or if a word was spoken,  
flowing tears replied. From that hour, the town was under con-  
viction. Few revivals ever reach a community as did that fol-  
lowing this sermon. Not a family in town, I suppose, but was  
moved to some special seriousness." A revival among his own  
people at this time (1831) brought an addition of sixty- one to the  
church in Brimfield, of whom one-half were heads of families.  
 
After laboring twenty years and eight months in Brimfield  
with such results as are already sufficiently indicated, in 1884,  
Mr. Vaill received a unanimous call from the Second Congrega-  
tional Church in Portland, Me., where he labored three years  
with a good degree of acceptance and usefulness. But the cli-  
mate did not agre.e with his health he never felt quite at home  
there it was not altogether a success. And in the autumn of  
1837, he was re-called to Brimfield and re-installed over his old  
people who welcomed him to their pulpit, to their homes, and to  
their hearts. He had remained with them, however, only about  
four years, thus making his entire ministry to them about a  
quarter of a century, when he yielded to the pressing call of the  
Trustees and became the General Agent of Amherst College.  
After nearly four years of self-denying and indefatigable service  
to the College, having accomplished the object of the agency so  
far as it was possible for any one to accomplish it, he accepted a,  
call to Somers, Conn., where, on the 6th of August, 1845, he  
was installed pastor of the church, so long favored with the  
labors of Dr. Charles Backus who kept there a school of the  
prophets in which more than fifty young men were fitted for the  
ministry. President Hitchcock preached the Installation Ser-  
mon. About a year after his settlement, the church enjoyed a  
revival of religion and gathered in as the fruits of it an addition  
of fifty members. The last year of his labors there was also a  
year of revival. But he found the field too extended and the  
work too laborious for his advancing age ; and after an accepta-  
 
reached the age of sixty-four, he resigned his charge in order to  
accept a call of the church at Palmer where he would be near  
the scene of his early ministry, near also to the College in which  
he felt so deep an interest, and where, the population being less  
numerous and less scattered, the burden of care and labor would  
be more easily borne.  
 
He was installed over the Second Church in Palmer, Decem-  
ber 6, 1854, among whom he continued to perform the duties of  
pastor more than twelve years, still preaching with comfort to  
himself and satisfaction to his hearers, still seeing his labors  
blessed with revivals of religion and ingatherings into the church.  
At the end of this period, being now over seventy-five years of  
age, he resigned his pastorate and relinquished the stated em-  
ployment of the ministry, in which he had been engaged more  
than "fifty-two years since his ordination in Brimfield. He still  
continued to preach, however, quite regularly in the neighboring  
1864, commemorative of his settlement in that place fifty years  
previous, which was dedicated to his former charge and pub-  
lished at their request, he gives the following summary of his  
labors in the ministry : " I have received six hundred and forty-  
five persons to the church, mostly by profession, have adminis-  
tered seven hundred and sixty-seven baptisms, officiated at  
eight hundred and ninety-six funerals, and joined in marriage  
five hundred and thirty-six couples. From the most reliable  
data I conclude that I must ha\e preached more than seven  
thousand times and not less than six thousand written sermons,  
though my manuscript sermons will not greatly exceed two  
thousand, and of course many of them have been preached  
again and again. I may add that I have preached in all twenty-  
four ordination and installation sermons, besides a considerable  
number on special occasions before missionary and benevolent  
societies."  
 
Dr. Vaill was once invited to the Secretaryship of the Massa-  
 
York. He received also several calls to churches, which he  
felt it his duty to decline. Besides his trusteeship of Amherst  
College, he was thirty years a Trustee of Monson Academy,  
almost fifty years a Trustee of Amherst Academy, and a  
Trustee of the Theological Seminary at Bangor while he was  
resident in Maine.  
 
In the autumn of 1868, the second Representative District  
of Hampden County honored itself even more than it honored  
him. by electing Dr. Vaill its representative in the Legislature  
of Massachusetts. " And it was a delicate and not undeserved  
compliment paid him by his colleagues, when, out of respect to  
his years and standing, he was allowed to select his own loca-  
tion in the representative chamber before the general drawing  
for seats commenced." l He entered heartily and with a keen  
relish into the duties of this office. It was hoped that, by his  
knowledge and his personal influence, he might render another  
service to his beloved College by furthering an application for  
pecuniary aid from the Legislature. His last service as a leg-  
islator was in connection with the committee on the question  
of temperance, then before the Commonwealth. He had just  
prepared a clear and able paper, expressive of his views and  
the position he wished to maintain, which he read to his asso-  
ciates as he came up with the Legislature on their excursion to  
Amherst. But " he had scarcely set foot on the platform at  
Palmer, when by the rupture of some silver cord of life within, he  
was called to recognize the mortal summons. From that hour,  
(on "Wednesday) he steadily declined, till on the morning of  
Monday, February 22, 1869, in the seventy-ninth year of his  
age he peacefully breathed out his spirit into the bosom of his  
God." " During his closing hours, he requested his friends  
present to sing that beautiful hymn so dear to all Christians,  
' Jesus, lover of my soul.' When quite near the end, he re-  
peated the words of Scripture : ' The sting of death is sin, but  
thanks be unto God, who giveth us the victory through our  
Lord Jesus Christ.' " 2  
 
Mr. Vaill was elected a member of the Board of Trustees  
the same year in which the College went into operation, (1821,)  
 
1 Commemorative Discourse preached at his funeral by President Stearns. 2 Ibid.  
 
and continued a member till his death in 1869. During this en-  
tire period of almost half a century, he was present at every an-  
nual meeting of the Board, and at nearly all the special meetings,  
and in almost every instance was present at the opening of the  
meeting. Such an example of scrupulous fidelity to an outside  
trust has never come under my observation. In 1833, he was  
made a member of the Prudential Committee, of which he was  
a member nearly all the subsequent years of his life; and he  
was as faithful in his attendance upon its meetings as upon those  
of the Corporation. He entered almost from the beginning  
upon the work of collecting funds for the Institution, and as  
early as 1823 took various excursions for this purpose. In the  
following year he engaged again in the work, and in the course of  
the two years, he was instrumental of raising about four thou-  
sand dollars. His next considerable agency was in 1827 and  
1828, in the prosecution of which he was absent from his people  
more than two months, his pulpit meanwhile being supplied at  
the expense of the Corporation. In raising the fifty thousand  
dollar subscription in 1832, the principal responsibility devolved  
upon him. For this purpose he visited New York and Boston  
and other cities, and on the last day of December he had the  
pleasure of writing to the President from Boston that the sub-  
scription, which, to be binding, must be filled up before the  
close of the year, was full an announcement which was received  
with so much joy at Amherst that the College buildings were  
illuminated in the evening. 1  
 
In the autumn of 1841, Mr. Vaill was finally dismissed from his  
people at Brimfield to undertake, at the unanimous and urgent  
request of the Trustees, the herculean labor of raising by private  
subscription a sum not less than a hundred thousand dollars.  
The necessit3 r for this effort, and its results, have been narrated  
in a former chapter. Of the struggle and toil and anxiety which  
it cost him, let him speak for himself: "This brought me into  
positively the most painful dilemma of my life. But there was  
no resisting. There was but one voice among the friends of  
the College abroad, and my friends here (at Brimfield) mag-  
nanimously consented to give me up. I was accordingly dis-  
 
missed, and in due time took leave of my quiet and pleasant  
home in this gem of a village, and of a people around whom  
clustered the warmest affections of my heart, to be tossed from  
pillar to post over the land in the thankless business of beg-  
ging, and especially thankless as it regarded Amherst College,  
which, as a poor helpless child, had knocked so many times at  
the doors and hearts of the people as well as of the State, as to  
have created no small degree of impatience.  
 
" For four long years I was afloat on the wave, amid storm  
and sunshine, sometimes indeed calm and pleasant, and then  
lashed up into foaming billows. But my covenant God was  
with me, and the prayers of the friends of the College were  
with me, and at length, after many a struggle, the work was  
in some most gratifying measure accomplished, arid Amherst  
College breathed again, not with feverish but quickened pulse.  
She breathes still, and for aught I can discern, is like to breathe  
and trial, but as to their usefulness to the church and the world,  
they form the culminating point of the half-century of my pub-  
lic life. I never for one moment regretted engaging in this  
work. Why should I ? Behold what has been wrought through  
the instrumentality of Amherst College in advancing the in-  
terests of sound learning, of natural and moral science and of  
evangelical religion ! Behold, what a multitude of young men,  
some of whom, as preachers, are among the most gifted in the  
land, has it sent forth to bless the world. Nearly half of its  
more than fifteen hundred graduates has it put into the minis-  
try, numbers of whom are occupying some of the most im-  
portant posts of usefulness in this land and in foreign countries.  
How many missionary stations all over the heathen world are  
now graced with the sons of Amherst, and to how many hun-  
dreds of churches has it given pious, faithful and efficient pas-  
tors ? I thank God that I was thus early called to labor for  
this school of the prophets, and it has more emphatically been  
such a school in proportion to the number of its graduates, than  
 
Mr. Vaill was master of the art of " begging." He united all  
the earnestness and persistency of Col. Graves with a suavity  
and tact which Col. Graves did not possess. He approached  
the merchants in the great cities with the courtesy and the con-  
sideration for their time and their habits of business which are  
so indispensable to gain their attention and favor. He hung  
around the shops and stalls and talked the mechanics and mar-  
ket men gradually out of their indifference, perchance their  
aversion, and into sympathy with his cause. He visited well-  
to-do farmers at their houses, or on their farms, wherever he  
could find them, and was as much a farmer as any of them, and  
the College which he represented was a genuine College for  
farmers and the middle classes. In short, he might, with almost  
literai truth, have applied to himself the language of Paul :  
" To the Jews I became as a Jew that I might gain the Jews.  
To the weak became I as weak that I might gain the weak.  
I became all things to all men that by all means I might save  
some." He made some enemies as well as friends, but the fault  
was not his own, it was the fault of the times and the situation,  
and no wisdom or ingenuity of man could have prevented this  
incidental evil. He did not make the, College rich, or even  
plant it on a solid pecuniary foundation. But he raised far  
more money than any other agent or friend of the College has  
ever raised by general subscription ; and he reaped this harvest on  
a field which had been not only gleaned, but burnt over again  
and again by a succession of agents for a quarter of a century.  
 
As General Agent of the College during this period of four  
years, Mr. Vaill not only solicited subscriptions and looked after  
the funds, but took an oversight of the buildings and grounds,  
superintended grading and the planting of trees, preached fre-  
quently and acceptably in the chapel and at evening lectures,  
aided in seeking and finding presidents and professors, and  
made himself useful in many and various ways. So far from  
seeking to perpetuate his connection with the College he ad-  
vocated, if he did not originate, the plan which was adopted by  
President Hitchcock and the Professors to stop at once further  
running in debt and further begging, which of course involved  
 
On his resigning the general agency in 1845, the Trustees  
passed a vote of thanks for his able and faithful services, and re-  
quested him to continue such services as far as his other engage-  
ments would permit. At their annual meeting in 1851, they  
conferred on him the honorary degree of Doctor of Divinity.  
 
Dr. Hitchcock pays a just and cordial tribute to the character  
and services of Dr. Vaill in his Reminiscences of Amherst Col-  
lege : " Gentlemanly and bland as well as Christian in his de-  
meanor and intercourse, and deeply convinced of the impor-  
tance of the object, he pleaded the cause of the College with  
much success, and had it not been for the funds which he ob-  
tained, I know not how it could have been carried forward."  
_ President Stearns considered his agency as having " saved the  
College, in those early days, from financial ruin," and highly  
appreciated his services in after years. In his Commemorative  
Discourse preached at his funeral, he says : " Among the many  
noble benefactors of Amherst College, whether of the living or  
the dead, when its history comes to be fully written, few names  
will stand higher than that of Joseph Vaill. A self-sacrificing  
friend of it in the early days of its weakness and poverty, a  
constant attendant upon the meetings of its Trustees and its  
Commencements, in labors more abundant for it than any other  
man's, cheerfully giving his time and his prayers to its interests,  
he rejoiced in its prosperity more than in any personal advantage  
and performed a service for the College which its warmest grati-  
tude never can sufficiently repay."  
 
To see how " the oldest member of the Board " enjoyed Com-  
mencements, dedications of new buildings and other celebra-  
tions in the days of the prosperity of the College, was a marked  
feature of such occasions which gave sincere satisfaction to his  
and its friends, and became a sort of proverb to indifferent spec-  
tators. He was himself conscious of a natural if not an excess-  
ive fondness for pomp and ceremony. " Am I not a little less  
sophomorical than I used to be," he once asked his good friend,  
President Stearns, to which the President courteously replied,  
that he had never seemed sophomorical to him. Called fre-  
 
But if there was any slip in word or deed, his prominent posi-  
tion, with a touch of grandiloquence in his manner, gave addi-  
tional point to the joke. Hence the anecdotes that were current  
while he lived, as for instance, when at the close of certain pub-  
lic exercises, he invited the audience to unite with the choir in  
singing the Doxology " in long metre, standing ! " His prayer  
at the placing of the corner-stone of Walker Hall was consid-  
ered rather long, especially by the students, and some rumors  
of this feeling probably reached his ears. " Was my prayer too  
long ? " asked the Doctor of the President after the close of the  
services. " Not too long for me to join in with pleasure," was  
the President's polite response. " Was it too long in the estima-  
tion of others ? " the Doctor persistently inquired. " Some of  
the students, I fear, thought it rather long," answered the  
President. " Have criticisms to that effect come to your ears ? "  
asked the Doctor. The President was obliged to acknowledge  
that they had. " Well," concluded the Doctor, " I can not con-  
sent to have my prayers measured off by the fingers or the face  
of a watch." He was somewhat sensitive to criticism. There  
was also in him a spice of egotism. But in his last years this  
only added to the charms of his conversation. He had quite a  
vein of humor and anecdote which made him a very entertain-  
ing companion, and sometimes kept a large company laughing  
at the dinner table or a social party through the entire evening.  
In his last trip from Boston to Palmer, in company with a large  
number of the members of the Legislature, it is said that he  
was in his element, and kept not a few of his fellow-legislators  
much of the time in a roar of laughter. He would gladly have  
made one more effort to increase the funds of Amherst College.  
If he had lived, the Trustees would probably have petitioned  
the Legislature for a grant he would have presented the peti-  
tion, and by dint of earnestness and perseverance, together  
with the magnetism of his sympathy with the object, and his  
personal influence, he might perhaps have succeeded in the  
effort. It would have been a fulness of joy and triumph, more  
perhaps than he could have contained. And how much lie  
would have enjoyed the semi-centennial, how much it would  
have added to the enjoyment of it by the Trustees, by the Pres-  
 
ident aud Professors, and by many of his friends and friends of  
the College, if he had lived to see that day, as he and they  
fondly hoped that he would ! But that, perhaps, would have  
been a cup of prosperity and happiness too large and full to be  
raised to mortal lips. The old Greeks, with their heathen my-  
thology, would have said, it was prevented by " the envy of the  
gods." We could only say, it was wisely ordered, because or-  
dered by Him who does all things well.  
 
