CHAPTER VI.  
 
ERECTION OF THE FIRST COLLEGE EDIFICE INAUGURATION  
 
No sooner was it settled by the action of the Legislature, that  
Williams College would not be removed to Northampton, than the  
Trustees of Amherst Academy entered in earnest upon the work  
which had now clearly devolved upon them. Accordingly on  
the 15th of March, 1820, they resolved, " That this Board con-  
sider it their duty to proceed directly to carry into effect the  
provisions of the constitution for the classical education of indi-  
gent and pious young men, and the Financier is hereby directed  
to proceed with as little delay as possible to effect a settlement  
with subscribers, to procure notes and obligations for the whole  
amount of the subscriptions, and also to solicit further subscrip-  
voted, " that Samuel F. Dickinson, H. W. Strong, and Nathaniel  
Smith, Esquires, Dr. Rufus Cowles and Lieut. Enos Baker be a  
committee to secure a good and sufficient title to the ten acres  
of land conditionally conveyed to the Trustees of this Academy  
as the site of said Institution by the late Col. Elijah Dickinson,  
and for the special benefit of the Charity Fund ; to digest a plan  
of a suitable building for said Institution ; to procure subscrip-  
tions, donations or contributions for defraying the expense  
thereof ; to prepare the ground and erect the same, as soon as  
the necessary means can be furnished, the location to be made  
with the advice and consent of the Prudential Committee." At  
this meeting it was further resolved, " that great and combined  
 
exertions of the Christian public are necessary to give due effect  
to the Charitable Institution ; " and Rev. Joshua Crosby, Jona-  
than Grout, James Taj^lor, Edwards Whipple, John Fiske and  
Joseph Vaill were appointed agents to make application for  
additional funds, and for contributions to aid in erecting suita-  
ble buildings for the accommodation of students.  
 
The committee proceeded at once to execute the trust com-  
mitted to them, secured a title to the land, marked out the  
ground for the site of a building one hundred feet long, thirty  
feet wide and four stories high, and invited the inhabitants of  
Amherst friendly to the object to contribute labor and materials  
with provisions for the workmen. With this request, the inhab-  
itants of Amherst friendly to the Institution, together with some  
from Pelham and Leverett and a few from Belchertown and  
Hadley, cheerfully complied. Occasional contributions were  
also received from more distant towns, even on the mountains.  
The stone for the foundation was brought chiefly from Pelham  
by gratuitous labor, and provisions for the workmen were fur-  
nished by voluntary contributions. Donations of lime, sand,  
lumber, materials of all kinds, flowed in from every quarter.  
Teams for hauling and men for handling, and tending, and  
unskilled labor of every sort, were provided in abundance.  
Whatever could be contributed gratuitously, was furnished with-  
out money and without price. The people not only contributed  
in kind but turned out in person and sometimes camped on the  
ground and labored day and night, for they had a mind to work  
like the Jews in building their temple, and they felt that they too  
were building the Lord's house. The horse-sheds which run  
along the whole line, east of the church, and west of the land  
devoted to the College, were removed. The old Virginia fence  
disappeared. Plow and scraper, pick-axe, hoe and shovel,  
scholarship of the first class the Class of 1822, more than fifty years ago brought  
the first load of stone upon the ground, as a free-will offering. " That gentleman  
was x Wells Southworth. Esq., of New Haven, Conn. Those granite blocks are now  
 
and stirring scene such as the quiet town of Amherst had  
never before witnessed, and which the old men and aged  
women of the town who participated in it when they were  
boys and girls, were never weary of relating. The foundations  
were speedily laid. On the 9th of August they were nearly  
completed and ready for the laying of the corner-stone. The  
walls went up, if possible, still more rapidly. We doubt if there  
has been anything like it in modern times. Certainly we have  
never seen nor read of a parallel. The story, as told by eye-  
witnesses and actors, is almost incredible. " Notwithstanding,"  
says Mr. Webster, a man who was not given to exaggeration,  
"notwithstanding the building committee had no funds for  
erecting the building, not even a cent, except what were to be  
derived from gratuities in labor, materials and provisions, yet  
they prosecuted the work with untiring diligence. Repeatedly  
during the progress of the work, their means were exhausted,  
and they were obliged to notify the President of the Board 1 that  
they could proceed no further. On these occasions the Presi-  
dent called together the Trustees, or a number of them, who,  
by subscriptions of their own, and by renewed solicitation for  
voluntary contributions, enabled the committee to prosecute  
the work. And such were the exertions of the Board, the  
committee and the friends of the Institution that on the nine-  
tieth day from the laying of the corner-stone, the roof timbers  
were erected on the building." " I heard it stated by several  
individuals," says Rev. E. A. Beach of the Class of '24, " that  
there was seldom a greater amount of material on hand than  
would last the workmen a week, sometimes not even so much  
as that. On one occasion, in the afternoon the last hod of  
mortar was deposited on the scaffold, and there was not a peck  
of lime with which to make more. The workmen were about  
to pack up their tools to go to another job, when Col. Graves  
came upon the ground, and entreated and finally persuaded  
them to wait till morning. As they were returning to their  
quarters for the night, a strange team was seen coming through  
the village from the north. It proved to be a wagon loaded  
 
1 Immediately after the laying of the corner-stone, Rev. Dr. Parsons resigned the  
 
with lime sent some twenty-five miles by a man not a sub-  
scriber, but a friend to the cause, who having lime to spare,  
and believing that it would be acceptable to those who had  
charge of the building, had, unsolicited and uninformed of  
their necessities, despatched a load from such a distance to  
meet such an emergency ! This is only one among many in-  
stances in which Providence seemed to interpose to remove  
obstacles to the progress of the work."  
 
" It seemed," exclaims President Humphrey, "it seemed more  
like magic than the work of the craftsmen ! Only a few weeks  
the same way that well from which so many generations of  
students have since drank health and refreshment, and which is  
usually one of the first things that an Amherst alumnus seeks  
when he revisits his Alma Mater. And " when the roof and  
chimneys were completed, the bills unpaid and unprovided for  
were less than thirteen hundred dollars."  
 
Here the work was suspended for the winter. But it was re-  
sumed in the spring, and then the interior of the building was  
finished by similar means, and with almost equal dispatch. In  
order to procure additional means for this and other purposes,  
at a meeting of the Trustees in February, 1821, a committee  
of four persons, Rev. Messrs. Porter, Clark, Whipple and Vaill  
were appointed as agents " to make application to evangelical  
associations to combine their efforts to carry into effect the  
designs of this Institution, to form societies and to invite  
the aid of societies already formed for charitable purposes,  
and in short to procure donations for enlarging the funds and  
maintaining the professorships." By the middle of June the  
building was so nearly completed that the Trustees made ar-  
rangements for its dedication in connection with the inaugu-  
ration of the President and Professors, and the opening of  
the College in September. And before the end of Septem-  
ber, not only was the edifice finished, but about half of the  
room's were furnished for the reception of students, through  
the agency of churches and benevolent individuals, especially  
5  
 
of the ladies in different towns in Hampshire and the adjoining  
counties.  
 
We must now go back to give some account of the exercises  
at the laying of the corner-stone, the appointment of officers of  
corner-stone substantially as it was given to the public shortly  
after the occasion : " On the 9th of August, 1820, the Board of  
Trustees of Amherst Academy, together with the subscribers  
to the fund then present, a number of the neighboring clergy  
and the preceptors and students of the Academy, preceded by  
the building committee and the workmen, moved in procession  
from the Academy to the ground of the Charity Institution.  
The Throne of Grace was then addressed by Rev. Mr. Crosby  
of Enfield, and the ceremony of laying the corner-stone was  
performed by the Rev. Dr. Parsons, President of the Board, in  
presence of a numerous concourse of spectators ; after which an  
address was delivered by Noah Webster, Esq., Vice-President  
of the Board. The assembly then proceeded to the church where  
an appropriate introductory prayer was made by the Rev. Mr.  
Porter of Belchertown, a sermon delivered by the Rev. Daniel  
A. Clark of Amherst, and the exercises concluded with prayer  
by the Rev. Mr. Grout of Hawley. The performances of the  
day were interesting, and graced with excellent music.  
 
On the same day, at a meeting of the subscribers to the fund,  
having been duly notified, the Rev. Nathaniel Howe of Hopkin-  
ton being chosen Moderator, and the Rev. Moses Miller of Heath,  
Secretary, the meeting was opened with prayer by the Modera-  
tor, and the following gentlemen were then elected Overseers of  
the Fund, namely : Henry Gray, Esq., of Boston, Gen. Salem  
Towne, Jr., of Charlton, Rev. Theophilus Packard of Shelburne,  
Rev. Thomas Snell of North Brookfield, Rev. Luther Sheldon  
 
Webster, Esq , Vice-President ; Rev. James Taylor, Rev. Joshua  
Crosby, Rev. Daniel A. Clark, Nathaniel Smith, Esq., Samuel  
F. Dickinson, Esq., and Rufus Graves, Esq. After the public  
exercises of this occasion, Dr. Parsons resigned his seat in the  
Board, and Noah Webster, Esq., was elected President of the  
Board.  
 
By request of the Trustees the address of Mr. Webster and  
the sermon of Mr. Clark were both printed and published. In  
reading them, no thought strikes us so forcibly as the philan-  
thropic, Christian and missionary spirit of the founders. "Too  
long," says Mr. Webster, " have men been engaged in the bar-  
barous work of multiplying the miseries of human life. Too  
long have their exertions and resources been devoted to war and  
plunder, to the destruction of lives and property, to the ravage  
of cities, to the unnatural, the monstrous employment of en-  
slaving and degrading their own species. Blessed be our lot !  
We live to see a new era in the history of man an era when  
reason and religion begin to resume their sway, and to impress  
the heavenly truth that the appropriate business of men is to  
imitate the Saviour, to serve their God and bless their fellow-  
men With what satisfaction will the sons of its bene-  
factors hereafter hear it related, that a missionary educated by  
their father's charity, has planted a church on the burning sands  
of Africa or in the cheerless wilds of Siberia that he has been  
the instrument of converting a family, a province, perhaps a  
no other that ever rose ; designed to bestow gratis a liberal edu-  
cation upon those who will enter the gospel ministry, but who  
are too indigent to defray the expense of their own induction.  
It has been founded and must rise by charity. And any man  
who shall bring a beam or a rock, who shall lay a stone or drive  
a nail, from love to the kingdom of Christ, shall not fail of his  
reward. I believe this Institution will collect about it the friends  
of the Lord Jesus, will be fed by their philanthropy and watered  
by their prayers, and will yet become a fountain pouring forth  
 
In vision I see it among the first Institutions of our land, the  
younger sister and the best friend of our theological seminaries,  
the center of our education societies, the solace of poverty, the  
joy of the destitute, and the hope and the salvation of perishing  
millions."  
 
. The very title of this sermon, viz : "A Plea for a Miserable  
World," strikes the key-note of this charitable enterprise, and  
history herself, looking back after the lapse of half a century,  
can hardly describe the actual result more exactly than in those  
very words of faith and hope and almost prophetic vision which  
Rev. Daniel A. Clark uttered at the laying of the corner-stone.  
 
The connection between the Charitable Institution at Amherst,  
and those education societies which had sprung up a little earlier  
and were born of the same missionary spirit, could not but be  
very intimate and productive of most important results. As  
early as September, 1820, a committee of the Trustees were  
directed to correspond with the American Education Society on  
the subject of the terms on which the Board might co-operate  
with that society in the education of their beneficiaries. At a  
meeting of the Board in November, 1820, the Trustees passed  
a vote authorizing the Prudential Committee to receive into  
the Academy as beneficiaries from education societies or else-  
where, charity students, not exceeding twenty. In June, 1821,  
they voted that persons wishing to avail themselves of the  
Charity Fund as beneficiaries, should be under the patronage of  
some education society or other respectable association which  
should furnish to each beneficiary a part of his support, amount-  
ing at least, to one dollar a week, for which he was to be furnished  
with board and tuition. They required also, that every applicant  
should produce to the examining committee, satisfactory evi-  
dence of his indigence, piety and promising talents.  
 
As the constitution required that the Charity Fund should  
forever be kept separate from the other funds of the Institution,  
and under another financier, at a meeting November 8, 1820,  
the Trustees appointed Jonn Leland, Esq., as their agent to  
receive all donations made for the benefit of the Charity Institu-  
tion, other than those made to the permanent fund. For this  
office which he held fourteen years, Mr. Leland never received  
 
a salary of more than three hundred dollars. At the same time  
the commissioner of the Charity Fund received only two hun-  
dred dollars per annum, for his services. It will be seen that  
the Institution commenced on a basis of economy, in reference  
both to its officers and its students, which corresponded with its  
charitable object.  
 
At a meeting of the Trustees of Amherst Academy on the  
8th of May, 1821, it was " Voted unanimously that the Rev.  
Zephaniah Swift Moore be, and he is hereby elected President  
of the Charity Institution in this town.  
 
" Voted that the permanent salary of the President of this  
Institution for his services as President and Professor of Theol-  
the President, provided they could procure sufficient donations  
of money, materials and labor. They also decided that the first  
term of study in the Institution should commence on the third  
Wednesday of September. It is worthy of record that at this  
meeting they passed a vote prohibiting the students from drink-  
ing ardent spirits or wine, or any liquor of which ardent spirits  
or wine should be the principal ingredient, at any inn, tavern or  
shop, or keeping ardent spirits or wine in their rooms, or at any  
time indulging in the use of them. Thus early was temperance  
as well as economy established as one of the characteristic and  
fundamental principles of the Institution. It is an interesting  
coincidence, that at this meeting in May when President Moore  
was elected to the presidency, the Rev. Heman Humphrey of  
Pittsfield, who was destined to succeed him in the office,  
preached in accordance with a previous appointment, " a very  
President Moore says : " Previous to receiving any notice of  
your appointment I had made up my mind to resign my office in  
this College next Commencement. Providence had clearly made  
 
those who are the friends of evangelical truth with respect to  
the necessity, prospects and usefulness of such an Institution  
as that contemplated at Amherst. I have much reason to be-  
lieve there is extensively an agreement on this subject. In my  
own opinion, no subject has higher claims on the charity and be-  
nevolent efforts of the Christian community than the education  
of pious young men for the gospel ministry. Their classical ed-  
ucation should be thorough, and I should be wholly averse to  
becoming united with any institution which proposes to give a  
classical education inferior to that given in any of the Colleges  
in New England. On this subject I am assured your opinion l  
is the same as my own, and that you are determined that the  
course of study in the Institution to which you have invited me  
shall not be inferior to that in the Colleges in New England. I  
am also assured that you will make provision for the admission  
of those who are not indigent, and who may wish to obtain a  
classical education in the Institution."  
 
That the Trustees were in perfect unison with the President  
in regard to these vital points to which he attached so much im-  
portance, they showed by voting in their meeting on the thir-  
teenth day of June that the preparatory studies or qualifica-  
tions of candidates for admission to the Collegiate Institution and  
the course of studies to be pursued during the four years of  
membership, should be the same as those established in Yale  
College. And that the public might not be left in doubt on  
these points, the President of the Board soon after gave public  
notice in the newspapers, that " Young men who expect to de-  
fray the expenses of their education, will be admitted into the  
S. Olds to be Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy  
in the Collegiate Charity Institution, and Joseph Estabrook to  
be Professor of the Greek and Latin Languages, and voted that  
 
Tuesday next preceding the third Wednesday of September,  
and that Prof. Stuart of Audover be invited to preach the dedi-  
cation sermon.  
 
On the 6th of August, 1821, the Rev. Jonas King was elected  
to be Professor of Oriental Languages in the Collegiate Institu-  
tion. Mr. King soon after went to Greece, and never accepted  
the appointment. His name, however, appeared on the cata-  
the exercises of dedication and of inauguration were held in  
the parish church. After introductory remarks by Noah Web-  
ster, Esq., President of the Board, in which he recognized the  
peculiar propriety " that an undertaking having for its special  
object the promotion of the religion of Christ, should be com-  
mended to the favor and protection of the great Head of the  
Church," and its buildings and funds solemnly dedicated to his  
service, a dedicatory prayer was offered by the Rev. Mr. Crosby  
of Enfield, and a sermon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Leland  
of Charleston, S. C., 1 from the text: "On this rock will I build  
my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."  
President Moore and Prof. Estabrook, 2 having publicly sig-  
nified their acceptance and their assent to the Confession of  
Faith 3 which had been prepared for the occasion, were then  
solemnly inducted into their respective offices by the President  
of the Board, with promises of hearty co-operation and support  
by the Trustees, and earnest prayers for ' ; the guidance and pro-  
tection of the great Head of the Church, to whose service this  
Institution is consecrated." A brief address was then delivered  
by each of them, and the concluding prayer was offered by the  
Rev. Mr. Snell of North Brookfield. At the close of the exer-  
 
1 " For special reasons, Prof. Stuart declined to preach on the occasion." Dr.  
Leland " was on a visit to his father, then resident in Amherst." Dr. Webster's  
Manuscript.  
 
2 Prof.Olds had signified his acceptance, but was not present at the inauguration.  
8 Of this Confession of Faith I find no record, except that it was reported to the  
 
Trustees by a committee appointed for the purpose immediately previous to the  
 
cises a collection was made for the benefit of the Institution ;  
and the corner-stone of the President's house was laid with the  
usual ceremonies.  
 
The next day, September 19, the College was opened and  
organized, by the examination and admission of forty-seven  
students, some into each of the four regular classes l " a larger  
number, I believe," says Dr. Humphrey, " than ever had been  
one-third of the whole number at Amherst, and a little less than one-fifth of the  
whole number in the three classes to which they belonged in Williams College.  
 
