CHAPTER XXVII.  
 
THE SEMI-CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION.  
 
NATIONS and institutions of the Old World which have ex-  
isted comparatively unchanged for hundreds, perhaps thousands  
of years, may look with contempt upon a seini-centennial cele-  
bration. But Americans who have not completed the first  
century of their national existence, and yet whose life, as meas-  
ured by the change, growth and progress of the people and their  
institutions, has been scarcely shorter than that of China herself,  
may be pardoned for celebrating the lapse of a half or even a  
quarter of a century. And the Alumni and friends of a College  
whose foundations were laid in a religious faith and consecration  
so nearly akin to those of the patriarchs and prophets of olden  
ows before, and thoughtful and loyal sons began to anticipate  
the time when they might revisit the homestead and celebrate  
the golden birthday of their mother. The first steps towards  
associated action were taken by Prof. Roswell D. Hitchcock  
of New York city. He brought the subject before the Alumni  
at their annual meeting, July 8, 1868, and at his motion the fol-  
lowing resolutions were adopted :  
 
" Whereas, our Alma Mater, in three years from now, will  
have completed her first half century, therefore,  
 
" Resolved, that the Trustees of the College be requested to  
make provision for the celebration of that event.  
 
" Resolved, that Prof. William S. Tyler, D. D., be requested  
 
for delivery at Commencement, 1871, and that he be requested  
also to address the Alumni on that occasion.  
 
" Resolved, that a committee of three be appointed to confer  
with the Trustees and with Prof. Tyler, and to act as a Com-  
mittee of Arrangements for our approaching semi-centennial."  
 
In accordance with this last resolution, Prof. R. D. Hitchcock,  
W. A. Dickinson, Esq., and Prof. R. H. Mather were appointed  
such a committee, to whom, at the annual meeting of the Alumni,  
July 13, 1870, Professors Edward Hitchcock and J. H. Seelye  
were added.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Board, July 9, 1868, the foregoing  
cial Committee, consisting of the President and Doctors Paine,  
Sabin, and Storrs, was appointed to make arrangements, con-  
jointly with the Committee of the Alumni, for the celebration  
of the Jubilee of the College in 1871.  
 
Prior to any meeting or action of either of these committees,  
there was some discussion and some difference of opinion among  
the Alumni and friends of the College as to the proper time for  
the celebration. As the first Commencement was held in 1822,  
the Commencement in 1871 would be, not the fiftieth but the  
forty-ninth anniversary of that day, and it seemed to some, at  
first thought, that the celebration should be at the fiftieth Com-  
mencement which would be in 1872. But it was the opening  
of the College to receive students, and not its first Commence-  
ment, which its friends desired to celebrate, and as it was agreed  
that Commencement week would be the most suitable and con-  
venient time for the celebration, the conclusion was quite unan-  
imously reached that the Commencement of- 1871, although it  
themselves, and conjointly with the Committee of the Trustees,  
the time and manner of the celebration were fixed, the speakers  
were selected, and the arrangements were made substantially as  
 
Not a few of the Alumni reached Amherst the Saturday-  
previous to Commencement, and remained till Friday or Satur-  
day of the next week, that they might have time to recall old  
recollections and keep a week of jubilee. The exercises of the  
week were opened as usual on Sunday by the Sacrament of the  
Lord's Supper in the chapel in the morning, and the Baccalaure-  
ate Sermon in College Hall in the afternoon. President Stearns,  
very appropriately, took for the text of his Baccalaureate, Levit-  
icus, 25 : 10, " Thou shalt hallow the fiftieth year," and dis-  
coursed on the religious history and characteristics of the Col-  
lege, paying at the same time a feeling and generous tribute to  
the men, especially the members of the Faculty, who, through  
poverty and reproach, had stood by it in its dark and trying  
hour.  
 
Monday and Tuesday were devoted as 'usual to the Prize  
exhibitions and declamations, and to the exercises of Class-  
day, the out-of-door performances of the latter, however, being  
nearly drowned out by copious showers which were to purify  
the air for the next day.  
 
Wednesday from early morning to a late hour in the evening  
was given up to the Jubilee. The day dawned auspiciously, and  
continued clear and bright, yet cool and comfortable even to its  
close. It seemed made it doubtless was made for the occa-  
sion. In the exercises of the morning, Hon. Samuel Williston,  
the generous and now venerable benefactor of the College, fitly  
presided. The exercises were opened with prayer by Rev. E.  
P. Humphrey, D. D., of Louisville, Ky., of the Class of '28,  
 
after which followed the Address of Welcome by President  
Stearns, and the Historical Discourse by Prof. Tyler.  
 
In the afternoon, Hon. A. H. Bullock of the Class of '36,  
presided, and addresses were made by the presiding oificer, by  
Prof. Snell, '22, Dr. Edward P. Humphrey, '28, Rev. H. N. 'Bar-  
 
1 Of the Turkish Mission.  
 
num, '52, Rev. H. W. Beecher, '34, Prof. E. A. Park, Prof. R.  
D. Hitchcock, '36, and Waldo Hutchins, Esq., '42.  
 
The addresses, both of the forenoon and afternoon, besides  
being printed in full at the time in The Springfield Republican,  
have been published in the form of a pamphlet, and, having  
been sent to the Alumni generally, have doubtless been read by  
most of the readers of this History. It is therefore quite unnec-  
essary that they should here be made the subject of analysis or  
remark. A letter from Dr. R. S. Storrs, of the Class of '89,  
which was read by Mr. Beecher, is also contained in this pam-  
phlet, together with the addresses of Prof. H. B. HackettJ '30,  
Bishop Huntington, '39, Hon. H. S. Stockbridge, '45, Willard  
Merrill, Esq, '54, and George C. Clarke, Esq., '58, which were  
not delivered for lack of time.  
 
The exercises were held beneath a spacious tent which was  
spread under the shadow of the trees in the grove where the  
students of Amherst, through all their generations, have found  
exercise and recreation, have walked and talked, have sat and  
conversed or meditated, and where every object that met the  
eye, whether in the grove or on the grounds, or in the distance,  
callgd up old memories, revived hallowed associations, and spoke  
with scarcely less power than the speakers, to their minds and  
hearts. The audience was large and the tent well filled in the  
morning. In the afternoon, it was full to overflowing, and it  
was calculated that there were at least three thousand persons  
in it, besides many who stood around the open sides, or sat in  
their own carriages on the grounds.  
 
Nearly seven hundred of the Alumni were present, that is  
almost one-half of the whole number of living graduates a  
number two or three times larger than had ever before attended  
Commencement, and " a larger proportion, probably, than ever  
assembled at any American College." Every Class was repre-  
sented. One-third of the first Class ('22) was present one-  
half of its living members. That half was Prof. Snell. He  
lamented in his address the absence of the other half which he  
modestly and playfully declared to be " the first half, the oldest  
half, the greatest half and the best half" the Rev. Pindar Field.  
All the surviving members of the second Class ('23) were pres-  
 
ent, viz. : Rev. Theophilus Packard and Rev. Hiram Smith,  
both from the far West ; '24, '26, and '27, were each represented  
by three persons, about one-third of the surviving members i  
and these came from almost as many different States and be-  
longed to nearly as many different occupations as there were  
persons. The Class of '25 was the only class, except that of  
Prof. Snell, of which there was but a single representative pres-  
ent, and he came from Conway in obedience to a telegraphic  
despatch sent by some zealous brother-alumnus that every class  
might be represented. '28 was represented by six out of seven-  
teen survivors, '29 by five out of nineteen, '30 by ten out of  
sixteen, '31 by fifteen out of thirty-seven, and '32 by nine out of  
twenty-three. So much for the first decade. In the second  
decade ('32-'42), the largest number present was from '39, viz.,  
sixteen out of thirty-seven living members ; and the largest pro-  
portion was from '36, viz., thirteen out of twenty-eight. The  
average attendance from the classes of this decade exceeded  
thirty-five per cent, of the living members. In the third decade  
the percentage was but little more than twenty-five. In the  
fourth decade it run up nearly to fifty per cent., and in the last  
period, as might have been expected, it rose to considerably  
more than half the living members. The largest number from  
any one class was from '69, who by special request granted by  
special favor of the Trustees, received their second degree in  
1871, and who were represented by thirty-three members. '65  
ranked next to '69, being represented by twenty-nine members.  
These facts which may perhaps be reckoned among the " Curi-  
osities of the Jubilee," have been gathered from the cards which  
were hung, one for each class, in the reception room in Walker  
Hall, and to which the names of the Alumni were transferred  
as fast as they registered them, so that each Alumnus might  
know who of his class were here, and where they were to be  
found. These cards or scrolls, (for they are more than a foot  
square,) have been preserved, and will be among the curiosities  
of literature in coming ages. The original register in which  
the Alumni entered their names as they arrived, may also be  
seen in the Library, and is an autograph book of rare and unique  
interest.  
 
The Alumni came from every part of our own country and  
from every quarter of the globe. Classmates and friends who  
boarded together, perhaps roomed together, perhaps sat side by  
side for four years, but who had not seen each other for ten,  
twenty, thirty, forty, almost fifty years, met as strangers, gazed  
in each other's faces, heard each other's voices, and perhaps did  
not discover a trace of the features or even the tones once so  
familiar, or did perhaps catch a ray, and at length, with the help  
maybe of a hint or allusion from a bystander, began to conjec-  
ture the person ; but when the discovery was made, they rushed  
into each other's embrace. Many such scenes of bewilderment  
marked these meetings and greetings in which the language was  
often little more than a strange mixture of laughter and tears.  
Wednesday evening was given up to a reunion in College Hall,  
and much of the night was spent in class meetings of such deep  
and thrilling interest as only they who have been present at  
such meetings know, and even they cannot fully tell.  
 
Besides his name, residence and occupation, each Alumnus  
registered the friends or family connexions " by whom " he was  
" accompanied." This column is not the least interesting and  
curious of the four, and shows that not a few of them came with  
a " wife," (sometimes a bride,') with " wife and child,'' " wife  
and son," " wife and daughter," " son and daughter," or as it is  
sometimes vaguely but suggestively recorded, " family." These  
accompaniments were all heartily welcomed, and their pleasure  
and the pleasure of seeing them added not a little to the enjoy-  
ment of the occasion. The hospitality of the good people of  
Amherst was thus tested, but it was not found wanting. Almost  
every family in town, and not a few out of town, opened their  
doors, and hosts and guests were alike pleased with their mutual  
intercourse. The only complaint that was heard from any of  
the families, was that some of them did not have all the guests  
that were promised them for entertainment. From the Alumni  
we have never heard, or heard o/, any complaints. They seem  
to have gone away pleased with themselves and each other,  
proud of their mother, loving their brothers, feeling that they  
had a good time, and fully persuaded that whoever should  
 
a still better time and find a great deal more to admire and re-  
joice in.  
 
Several of the classes left behind them class scholarships as an  
expression of their gratitude and filial devotion. The plan as  
originated by Prof. R. D. Hitchcock, contemplated at least one  
by each class. His own class set the example by establishing  
three. 1 Not every class will be able to found even one. Prob-  
ably there will not be in all as many as fifty scholarships. But  
most of the classes are doing something. The catalogue, issued  
in the fall of 1871, next after the Jubilee, announces fifty schol-  
arships in all, of which about half were not on the previous cat-  
alogue, 2 and several other class scholarships as established in  
part. When the harvest is all gathered in, perhaps the result  
will be not less than fifty scholarships of one thousand dollars  
each, which, with Mr. Williston's donation, will make up the  
handsome sum of one hundred thousand dollars of free-will  
offerings resulting directly or indirectly from the Jubilee.  
 
The distinguished Alumnus and Trustee who presided with  
characteristic dignity and grace at the Semi-Centennial celebra-  
tion, and whose address was one of the chief ornaments of the  
occasion, was in Europe when the chapter on the " Present  
Trustees" was written, and his biographical sketch, being de-  
ferred at the time for the sake of reliable information on some  
points, by one of those strange accidents which will sometimes  
happen, escaped the memory of the writer and so slipped out  
of the place which it was intended to occupy, thus leaving a  
space which to the reader will doubtless, like the absence of the  
image of Brutus in the Roman processions, only render him the  
more conspicuous. Let me make the best amends in my power  
by giving here in a place scarcely less appropriate the outlines  
only of a life with which the public is already well acquainted.  
Alexander Hamilton Bullock was born at Royalston, March 2,  
1816, passed his boyhood chiefly in his native place, came from  
there to College in 1832 and graduated in 1836, receiving the  
second appointment in a class in which that elegant and accom-  
plished scholar, the lamented William Bradford Homer, re-  
 
ceived the first. Besides pronouncing the Salutatory Oration  
at the Commencement, he also acted a leading part in that fa-  
mous Colloquy in which Ensign H. Kellogg, who was its author,  
rose from a seat among the audience and came walking over the  
tops of the pews to his place on the stage personating an Irish-  
man from the crowd so perfectly that the Sheriff was on the  
point of putting him under arrest. His Tutor in Mathematics  
has no recollection of particular accuracy or brilliancy in that  
department. But he excelled in the classics, belles-lettres, and  
rhetoric, and classmates and fellow-students saw the future Gov-  
ernor in his fine person, his courteous manners, his ambition and  
influence, and his decided bent for politics and public affairs.  
After five years devoted to general culture and the study of  
law, he was admitted to the bar in 1841. In 1845, '47 and '48,  
 
1859, he was Mayor of Worcester. From 1866 till 1869, he was  
Governor of Massachusetts.  
 
In 1865 he received the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws  
from his Alma Mater, and in 1866 the same degree was conferred  
on him by the University at Cambridge.  
 
One of the earliest Trustees chosen from among the Alumni,  
Mr. Bullock has now been a member of the Corporation twenty  
years. His address to the Society of Alumni, delivered on re-  
tiring from the presidency in 1863, and printed at their request,  
inaugurated the usage which still prevails, and, like the address  
at the Semi-Centennial, is not more remarkable for its classic  
elegance and grace than for love and devotion to Alma Mater.  
" The Bullock Scholarship of the Class of 1836 "one of the  
most liberal of these recent foundations gives expression to  
the same sentiments in acts that speak louder than words.  
 
