CHAPTER I.  
 
QUEEN'S COLLEGE CHARACTERISTICS AND HISTORICAL ASSO-  
CIATIONS OF THE CONNECTICUT VALLEY.  
 
THE want of a College in the valley of the Connecticut was  
felt previous to the Revolution, and sixty years before the  
establishment of the Collegiate Institution at Amherst, thirty  
years before the incorporation of Williams College, measures  
were taken for the founding of such an Institution in Hamp-  
shire County. Some of the inhabitants of that County pre-  
sented to the General Court, January 20, 1762, a memorial  
showing that " there are a great number of people in this County  
of Hampshire, and places adjacent, disposed to promote learn-  
ing, and by reason of their great distance from the Colleges and  
the great expense of their education there, many of good  
natural genius are prevented a liberal education, and a large  
country filling up at the north-west of them which will send a  
great number of men of letters." " They therefore pray for an  
act of the government constituting a Corporation with power  
to receive moneys and improve them for setting up a Seminary  
for learning, and that a charter may be granted to the Corpora-  
tion for the said Seminary endowing it with power to manage  
all the affairs relative to the same, and confer the honors of learn-  
ing upon the students of the same when qualified therefor."  
 
A bill was accordingly brought in for establishing "an Acad-  
emy in the western parts of this Province," which passed  
to be engrossed but was finally lost. But Francis Bernard,  
"Governor of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay," made  
out a charter incorporating Israel Williams and eleven others  
" a body politic by the name of the President and Fellows of  
Queen's College." This charter bears the date of February  
 
27, 1762. The proposed College was to be in Northampton,  
Hatfield or Hadley. It was to be on a footing with Harvard  
College in regard to means of instruction, though some of its  
officers were to have different names, and it was proposed to  
withhold from it the power of conferring degrees. It met with  
opposition from the eastern part of the Province, scarcely less  
strenuous than that which Amherst College encountered half a  
century later. The Board of Overseers of Harvard College,  
as soon as they heard of it, appointed a committee to wait imme-  
diately on the Governor and request him not to grant the said  
charter, another committee to draw up and present a " fuller  
statement of reasons against founding a College or Collegiate  
School in Hampshire County," l and a third " to guard against  
the influence of any application at home [that is, in England,]  
by the Hampshire petitioners, for a charter from home or else-  
where." Such a pressure was brought to bear upon the Gov-  
ernor that he promised not to give out the charter until the  
next session of the Legislature. He desired the corporators,  
however, to take a copy of the charter, and organize the body  
so far as to be in readiness to act as soon as the charter  
should receive the necessary confirmation. Accordingly the  
Corporation met March 17, 1762, at the house of Rev. John  
Hooker, in Northampton, and adjourned to meet again on the  
18th of May, in Hadley, at the house of Rev. Samuel Hopkins. 2  
But two causes seem to have operated effectually to prevent  
further action. Sympathy for Harvard College, much increased  
by a fire which consumed its library and philosophical apparatus,  
withstood the establishment of another College in the Province.  
And the excitement which preceded the American Revolution  
 
1 This remonstrance and statement of reasons occupies eleven pages in the Ap-  
pendix of Pierce's History of Harvard College. Many of the reasons are the same  
which were urged against the establishment of Amherst College. Religious preju-  
dices were also enlisted, for Governor Bernard was suspected of a design to favor  
Episcopacy in the proposed Institution. See Pierce's History of Harvard College.  
p. 281.  
 
2 The project seems to have proceeded so far that in Hatfield a building was  
erected or designated as " Queen's College," and students were in preparation for  
entering the College. This old gambrel-roofed school-house has been seen by  
persons now living who have heard it called " Queen's College " by Dr. Lyman  
 
soon absorbed the public attention. Thus it is that "coming  
events cast their shadows before," and history repeats itself in  
the origin of institutions as well as in the rise of states and  
the progress of nations. For who can fail to see in the incor-  
poration of this Institution so early in the centre of Hampshire  
County and in the arguments and influences that were brought  
to bear against it, a foreshadowing of the origin and early  
history of Amherst College.  
 
In their strong desire thus early to have a College of their  
own, the good people of old Hampshire, or which was then  
the same thing, of Western Massachusetts, showed themselves  
to be the genuine offspring of the first settlers on the Massachu-  
setts Bay, who founded Harvard College in the wilderness less  
than twenty years after the first landing on these shores. Edu-  
cated for the most part in old Cambridge, and deeply impressed  
with the inseparable connection between sound learning and  
pure religion, the early colonists of New England could not rest  
till they could see the walls and breathe the atmosphere of a  
Cambridge here. Animated by strong Christian faith and hope,  
and excited by the experience of persecution in the Old World,  
they were further quickened by the invigorating and stimulating  
atmosphere of New England. " For here," so Rev. John Hig-  
ginson, the first minister of Salem, wrote home to his friends  
after he had been a few months in this country, " here is an  
extraordinary cleer and dry aire that is of a most healing nature  
to all such as are of a cold, melancholy, flegmatick, rheumatick  
temper of body. . . . And therefore I think it a wise course  
for all cold complections to come to take physick in New Eng-  
ulating than that of the sea-shore, and the people have always  
been even more remarkable for their mental activity, and their  
universal thirst for education, than their fellow-citizens in the  
eastern part of the Commonwealth. " Old Hampshire County,  
extending originally from the uncertain eastern line of New  
York, on the west, into the present territory of Worcester  
 
the entire width of the Massachusetts patent, was, at first, in  
almost everything but the name, a colony of itself. The settle-  
ments were planted in the wilderness, and the waste of woods  
that lay between them and the seat of authority of the Massa-  
chusetts Bay was hardly less to be dreaded or easier of passage,  
than the waste of waters that interposed between the Bay and  
the Mother Country. Its interests have been developed by  
themselves. Its institutions, habits, and customs, have sprung  
out of its own peculiar wants, circumstances and spirit, and the  
history of Western Massachusetts is but the history of the old  
Mother Country and her children." l  
 
" No county in the State," says Dr. Dwight, " has uniformly  
discovered so firm an adherence to good order and good govern-  
ment, or a higher regard to learning, morals, and religion. As a  
body, the inhabitants possess that middle state of property, which  
so long and so often has been termed golden ; few are poor, and  
few are rich. They are almost independent in this high sense,  
that they live in houses and on lands which are their own, and  
which they hold in fee simple. The number of persons in a  
family in the County of Hampshire, exceeds that in the eastern  
counties, and marriages are more universal. Since these jour-  
neys were made, this noble county, after having existed as a fine  
doric column of industry, good order, morals, learning, and re-  
ligion, in Massachusetts, for more than a century, was by an  
unwise Legislature, broken into three parts." 2  
 
The valley of the Connecticut, from the time of its first settle-  
ment by the whites, has had a population and a history as pe-  
culiar as its soil, climate, surface, and natural scenery. Dear to  
the natives as the " Quonecticut," or " Long River," in whose  
waters they delighted to ply their light bark canoes, and to fish  
for the bass, salmon, and- shad, and on whose banks they built  
their most beautiful villages, and raised their richest fields of  
corn, this "famous river," or "little Nilus," as Cotton Mather  
 
2 Dr. Dwight's Travels in New England and New York, Vol. II., pp. 269-273.  
I have taken the liberty to abridge somewhat, the language of Dr. Dwight.  
 
And this beautiful river is interwoven with the whole character,  
history, and associations of the people whom it has attracted,  
and whose character it has formed, even as it wanders to and  
fro through the broad valley, shaping the picturesque outlines,  
forming the intervales, and enriching the meadows by its annual  
overflow. President Dwight in those travels to which we have  
already alluded, lingers in the valley of the Connecticut, devot-  
ing several letters to a description of its physical features, and  
the characteristics of its inhabitants, and dwells with peculiar  
fondness on the variety and richness of the landscape, the rare  
beauty of the villages, and the remarkable industry, intelligence,  
virtue, and piety of the people. The breadth of the " inter-  
vales," the meandering of the stream, the graceful curving of  
the banks fringed with shrubs and trees, the terraced outlines  
and gentle undulations of the meadows, " interspersed in par-  
allelograms," and " not divided by enclosures," making them to  
appear not as artificially fruitful, but as a field of nature, origi-  
nally furnished by the hand of the Creator, with all its beauties,  
with large and thrifty orchards in many places, and everywhere  
forest trees standing singly, of great height and graceful figure ;  
all these characteristic features which have been so enthusiastic-  
ally admired by residents and visitors from foreign lands at the  
present day, are noted and appreciated by this distinguished  
traveler, scholar, and divine of a former generation. Perhaps,  
then, the writer will not be charged with partiality or extrava-  
gance when he says, that although he has seen the Old World  
pretty thoroughly, from Windsor Park and Richmond Hill to  
the plain of Damascus, he has nowhere found such wide and  
varied fields of vegetable mosaic as stretch out, for instance, from  
the base of Mount Holyoke, nor anywhere shade trees of any  
kind that can be compared for mingled gracefulness and magnifi-  
cence with the elms that adorn the streets in either of the towns  
that were contemplated as the possible site of " Queen's College."  
The beauty of New England villages is universally recognized,  
whether by visitors from other sections, or travelers from foreign  
lands. Dr. Dwight finds this beauty in its highest perfection in  
the towns on or near the Connecticut River, and expatiates with  
much satisfaction on the plan of the villages, as it is there car-  
 
ried out, and the excellence of the social, intellectual, and moral  
results as they are there realized. The selection of the site, not  
like a village or large town in the Middle States, where trade,  
commerce or manufactures demand, but wherever beauty or con-  
venience, pleasure or moral uses may invite the bringing of the  
whole farming population into the village, to live side by side  
with the merchants, mechanics, and professional men, clustering  
around the church or churches, and the school-houses, as a nu-  
cleus and common centre, the distribution of the town plat into  
lots containing from two to ten acres, and the erection of the  
house, usually of wood painted white, and of ample dimensions,  
" at the bottom of the court-yard," with the singularly broad  
street in front, and the out buildings, the garden, orchard, and  
home-lot succeeding each other at convenient distances in the  
rear ; these are the characteristic features which have made the  
rural villages of the Connecticut famous the world over, for  
beauty and convenience. And these are partly the cause and  
partly the effect of the industry, thrift, intelligence, good order,  
good morals and religion, which are remarked by Dr. D wight and  
observed by so many other travelers, as characteristic of the peo-  
ple in the valley of the Connecticut. Such villages with such  
schools and churches, and such society, would naturally and  
inevitably blossom out into a College in due season, and isolated  
as they were in their early history, would surely seek a College  
in their neighborhood, that their schools and churches might  
find a sure supply of well educated teachers and preachers, and  
Valley, here deserve a passing notice. There is scarcely a  
town in the valley whose soil was not sprinkled with blood in  
the early wars with the Indians. In King Philip's War, Hadley  
was the head-quarters of the English troops in the river cam-  
paign. Detachments were also stationed in garrisons at North-  
ampton, Hatfield, Deerfield, and Northfield. A hot engagement  
took place near the base of Sugar-loaf Mountain, in which the  
Indians lost twenty-six killed, and the English ten. A company  
sent to convoy provisions from Hadley to the garrison at North-  
 
field, fell into an ambuscade within two miles of their destination,  
and of thirty-seven men who engaged in the expedition, only  
sixteen returned to tell of the disaster. Hatfield \vas attacked  
by seven or eight hundred savages and bravely and successfully  
defended. Springfield was invaded by Philip's warriors when  
its garrison had been chiefly drawn off to the defence of other  
towns, and burned to the ground ; and its inhabitants, left house-  
less and penniless, were so disheartened that they came near  
abandoning the settlement. And South Deerfield is memorable  
as the scene of the most terrible massacre of the whites by the  
Indians, recorded in the annals of New England. Capt. La-  
throp was detached from Hadley with eighty young men, " the  
very flower of the County of Essex," and a large number of  
teams, to bring off the grain which was stacked in large quanti-  
ties on the Deerfield meadows. They had threshed and loaded  
the grain, and had advanced on their return, as they thought,  
beyond the reach of danger, when, as they were crossing a  
sluggish stream which flowed through a swamp, and the team-  
sters, if not some of the soldiers, also, were eagerly plucking  
the grapes which hung in ripe and tempting clusters from the  
overhanging trees, the savage foe discharged a murderous fire  
upon them from behind every bush and tree, and then bursting  
from their hiding places, pursued the work of destruction,  
slaughtering the fleeing, and butchering the wounded, until  
ninety men, soldiers arid teamsters, lay weltering in their own  
blood. But while they were still engaged in massacring the  
living . and stripping the dead, they, in turn, were suddenly  
attacked by Capt. Moseley with his little band of heroes from  
the garrison at Deerfield, and ninety-six of them were slain in  
swift retaliation for the dreadful massacre which has conferred  
on its scene the befitting name of " Bloody Brook." A suita-  
ble monument, erected in 1835, marks the spot, and the oration  
then and there pronounced by the prince of our American pane-  
gyrical orators and listened to with so much interest by so many  
of the officers and students of Amherst College, will probably  
live as long as the monument itself will last, to commemorate  
the sufferings and sacrifices by which our fathers won this valley  
to civilization, learning and religion.  
 
The next campaign of King Philip's War, that of 1766, was  
remarkable for the great slaughter of the Indians by Capt.  
Turner, near the Falls in the Connecticut, which have ever since  
borne his name, and the subsequent disastrous retreat of his  
men, and the fall of their commander. In the same year occur-  
red also that attack upon Hadley, in which seven hundred Indians  
came upon the town early in the morning, and had already broken  
through the palisades and were spreading alarm and terror among  
the whole population, when suddenly a mysterious stranger, of  
remarkable form, and long flowing hair and beard, appeared  
among the affrighted villagers, rallied the soldiers, routed the  
enemy and put them to flight, and then disappeared as mysteri-  
ously as he had manifested himself unto them. The people then  
regarded him as an angel of God sent for their deliverance. They  
afterwards learned that their guardian angel was Goffe, " the  
regicide," and that Whalley, his father-in-law and fellow exile,  
resided at the same time in the family of the minister, Mr. Russell,  
and, with Goffe, had been there for nearly twelve years.  
 
In the wars which bear the names of King William and Queen  
Anne, Old Deerfield became famous for those sieges and cap-  
tivities which have ever since been as familiar to New England  
children as nursery tales ; almost as familiar as the catechism,  
and the New England Primer. The story of the captive, Eunice  
Williams, who became a savage and refused to return to civilized  
life, is quite a romance, and the question, " Have we a Bourbon  
among us," which has excited such a romantic interest in our  
own day, and which seemed likely enough at one time to grow  
into historical importance, is connected with a descendant of this  
" Deerfield Captive."  
 
There are comparatively few monuments of the " Revolution-  
ary War " in the valley of the Connecticut. The scene of that  
conflict lay chiefly on the sea-coast. Yet the people of .Western  
Massachusetts were not a whit behind their fellow-citizens in  
Boston and vicinity in offering first unarmed and then armed  
resistance to the encroachments of the Mother Country. There  
is scarcely a town in old Hampshire County whose records do  
 
or record the appointment of Committees of Vigilance and  
Public Safety, and the choice of delegates to act in concert with  
those of other towns in a Congress of the County, the Province,  
or the United Colonies. And when the war opened and as it  
progressed, we find them sending out men, arms and supplies  
year after year, with a liberality altogether beyond their wealth  
and population, till their resources were exhausted, and pouring  
out their treasure and their blood like water, for the common  
cause. A Congress of Committees from the several towns in  
the old County of Hampshire met in Northampton on the 22d  
and 23d of September, 1774, and passed with great unanimity  
resolutions that had in them the ring of resistance to the Stamp  
Act and to Taxation without Representation, and helped ' to  
prepare the way for the Declaration of Independence. When  
the news of the battle of Lexington reached Greenfield, the  
people of the town assembled " instanter," and the next morn-  
ing a volunteer company was on the march for the scene of  
action. Springfield, at first a' recruiting post and rendezvous for  
soldiers, was afterwards fixed upon as a depot for military stores  
and a place for repairing arms, manufacturing cartridges, and at  
length casting a few cannon, and in the " barn " which was used  
for these purposes in the war of the Revolution, we see the  
germ of the National Armory which during our late war fur-  
nished arms on so magnificent a scale for an army of a million  
of men and thereby saved " the Great Republic." " The late  
Gen. Mattoon of Amherst, one of Hampshire's bravest and most  
energetic spirits in the Revolution, used to tell of an order  
that he received from Gen. Gates to proceed to Springfield, and  
convey a number of cannon from that point to the field of  
operations in New York. The General rode from Amherst to  
Springfield on Sunday, and with a small body of men accom-  
plished the task, and ' these cannon told at Saratoga.' " 1 In  
the lectures which Prof. Fiske used to deliver on American his-  
tory, when he came to the lecture on the battle of Saratoga, he  
sometimes sent for the then aged and blind General to illustrate  
 
Accident has attached to this section more than its due share  
of credit in another and less honorable history, viz., that of " the  
Shays Rebellion." Shays who happened to give his name to a  
movement which he did not originate and was incapable of lead-  
ing, chanced to be a resident of Pelham when the discontent  
arising from a depreciated currency and the partly real and partly  
fancied sufferings of the people, together with the demoralization  
consequent upon the Revolutionary War, broke out into insur-  
rection against the government. To prevent the collection of  
debts and then to screen themselves from deserved punishment,  
the rebels who were only the offscouring of the army and never  
represented the real sentiments of the people, interrupted the  
sessions of the Courts repeatedly in Worcester and Berkshire,  
as well as Hampshire County. But gathering courage at length  
to attack the arsenal at Springfield, they were routed, and the  
division under Shays fled through Hadley and Amherst to  
Pelham where they soon scattered, the followers seeking their  
homes, and the leaders taking refuge in the neighboring States  
till, through the clemency of the government, they were all  
allowed to return under a general amnesty. Overruled for good,  
the Shays Rebellion strengthened the State government which  
it threatened to subvert, and was one of the causes or occasions  
that led to our present federal constitution.  
 
Among the great and good men who have shed lustre on  
the old County of Hampshire, one name towers above all others  
not only in influence and reputation at home, but ranks among  
the brightest ornaments of mankind. Jonathan Edwards wrote  
most of those great works which have perpetuated his fame and  
influence at Stockbridge, and his body rests at Princeton, N. J.,  
where he died in the prime of life as he was just entering upon  
the presidency of Nassau Hall College. But before he left  
Northampton h3 had already stamped his impress upon that  
'and the neighboring towns, changed the religious character and  
history of New England, and originated influences without which  
Amherst College would have been quite another institution from  
what it now is. His name, once cast out as evil, is now honored  
above all others at Northampton, and strangers who visit the  
 
the magnificent elms which he is said to have planted, and even  
seek out the spot in the cemetery where a slab, inscribed to his  
memory, stands by the side of those which mark the graves of  
his daughter Jerusha, and David Brainerd to whom she was  
betrothed.  
 
Among many other illustrious names which have adorned the  
history of this section, it will not be deemed invidious to men-  
tion those of Col. John Stoddard, Maj. Joseph Hawley, and  
Gov. Caleb Strong, of Northampton, Dr. Joseph Lyman, of  
Hatfield, and Judge Simeon Strong, and Gen. Ebenezer Mat-  
toon, of Amherst.  
 
But there were foundations for a College in the Connecticut  
Valley laid earlier than its earliest wars, and deeper than any  
events that were transacted on its surface. Long before the  
valley had any human inhabitants, there were " foot-prints on  
the sands of time," not so easily effaced as those of heroes,  
statesmen or divines, which hardened into stone, were to consti-  
tute the ichnological cabinets at Amherst ; there were antiqui-  
ties, histories, literatures, sciences, in comparison with which  
those of Greece and Rome are recent, written in the solid rocks  
in characters which a Hitchcock would begin to decipher, and  
other geologists would continue to read, which would make the  
Connecticut Valley beyond any portion of the Old World, a  
classic, almost a holy land to savans of every country through  
succeeding generations. For these foot-prints exist at Turner's  
Falls, at the base of Mount Tom and Mount Holyoke, in the  
Portland quarries and in the sandstone all through this valley, in  
Amherst College sprung, and into which it has struck its roots ;  
such some of the surroundings that impress themselves on the  
mind and character of its students ; and such the associations  
clustering about it, which, even to casual visitors and strangers,  
constitute some of its incidental attractions.  
 
