CHAPTER IX.  
 
LIVES OF SOME OF THE FOUNDERS.  
 
AT the laying of the corner-stone of the first College edifice,  
the Rev. Dr. Parsons presided as President of the Trustees of  
Amherst Academy. At the close of the exercises he resigned,  
and Noah Webster, Esq., was chosen President in his place.  
He was already more than seventy-one, and had resigned his  
pastorate about a year previous. He gave the land on which  
Amherst Academy was built, procured also a bell for its use at  
his own expense, was President of its Board of Trustees from  
its foundation till the laying of the corner-stone of South Col-  
lege, and contributed to its prosperity by his property, his time  
and presence, and his personal service in all ways that lay within  
his power. He was a liberal subscriber to the Charity Fund, 1 and  
when extraordinary exertions were necessary to complete the  
sum of fifty thousand dollars within the time, he and a few other  
citizens of Amherst signed an obligation making themselves lia-  
ble to the amount of fifteen thousand dollars. In the same  
spirit, even after he had resigned both the pastorate and the  
presidency of the Board of Trustees, so long as he lived he  
lived for the College, and was ready to put his shoulders to the  
wheel in every emergency. The counsels and contributions of  
Dr. Parsons worked in beautiful harmony with the prayers and  
active agency of Col. Graves ; and the study of the former, hot  
less than the closet of the latter, was one of the deep and hid-  
den sources from which the College sprung. The prime movers  
of the enterprise Graves, Dickinson, Strong, Smith came  
often to that study, especially when days were dark and friends  
seemed few, and they always went away enlightened, encouraged,  
 
1 His subscription was six hundred dollars.  
 
strengthened in the work of building a College, a whole College,  
and nothing less than a College A COLLEGE FOB CHRIST.  
 
David Parsons was born at Amherst, January 28, 1749 ; gradu-  
ated at Harvard College in 1771 ; was licensed to preach about  
the year 1775, and after having preached with much acceptance  
in several places, but in consequence of feeble health having  
concluded to relinquish the ministry and engage in mercantile  
business, in 1782 he was induced, by much urgency of the peo-  
ple, to accept the pastoral office in his native place as his fa-  
ther's successor. 1 In 1788 he preached the annual election ser-  
mon before the Legislature of Massachusetts. In 1795 he was  
elected Professor of Divinity in Yale College, but declined the  
appointment. In 1800 he received the degree of Doctor of Di-  
vinity from Brown University. During the latter part of his  
ministry there were several revivals of religion in his parish  
especially one in 1816, which resulted in an addition to his church  
of more than a hundred members, and probably had no unim-  
portant bearing on the founding and the character of Amherst  
College. After a ministry of nearly thirty-seven years, he was  
dismissed, at his own request, on the let of September, 1819.  
He died suddenly while on a visit to his friends at Wethersfield,  
Conn., May 18, 1823, a little more than a mouth previous to the  
death of President Moore. Both of these able and excellent  
men longed to see the College chartered, and then they would  
have been ready to say, " Now lettest thou thy servant depart  
in peace ; " but they died almost two years before the consum-  
mation which they so devoutly wished. Both of them, shortly  
before their death, visited Gol. Graves on what they supposed  
to be his dying bed, but in the mj'sterious providence of God  
they were appointed to a speedy death, while he recovered and  
lived to see his beloved College in the spring-tide of its early  
prosperity.  
 
The widow of Dr. Parsons, Mrs. Harriet Parsons, a daughter  
of Ezekiel Williams, of Wethersfield, lived known and highly  
esteemed by many students of Amherst College, for more than  
a quarter of a century, and died June 5, 1850, aged eighty-six.  
 
1 Rev. David Parsons, the father of Dr. Parsons, was the first pastor of the church.  
He preached five years as a candidate, and was pastor forty years.  
 
Two of Dr. Parsons' sermons were published, the election ser-  
mon in 1788, and a sermon at the ordination of J. L. Pomeroy  
in 1795.  
 
Being a good scholar, he was in the habit of receiving into  
his family, students who were suspended from Harvard College,  
and his instruction and discipline proved highly satisfactory to  
the College authorities. When Amherst College came into ex-  
istence, he still continued to receive into his family, students as  
boarders for a small compensation, or none at all if they were  
too poor to pay for their board ; and they were charmed by his  
instructive and entertaining conversation and the cultivation of  
his wife and children. "Most .of the time," says an alumnus of  
the first class, " I boarded in the family of Dr. Parsons. The  
father and mother were both then alive and the children all at  
home. It was a good, intelligent, cultivated family. The Doc-  
tor had many peculiarities and was unique in his expressions.  
in his dajr, and not a few of his witticisms still linger in the  
memory of those who knew him. Wit and drollery seem to  
have been spontaneous and quite beyond his control, never dis-  
turbing, it is said, the due solemnity of the pulpit, but often  
flashing out irresistibly in such close connection with serious  
things that the wit was enhanced by the incongruity. As he  
was returning once in a mood of unusual tenderness from the  
funeral of a near and dear friend, a brother in the ministry  
seized the occasion to remonstrate with him on his .want of the  
seriousness becoming his sacred profession. "I know it all,  
brother," was the immediate response, " and it has been my bur-  
den through life ; but I suppose after all, that grace does not  
cure squint eyes."  
 
It was customary in the good old times at the meetings of the  
Hampshire Association, as at other ministerial meetings, to fur-  
nish spirituous liquors for the entertainment of the ministers.  
Soon after the commencement of the temperance reformation,  
 
duced. The motion was made by the Doctor himself. He was  
as ready for the reform as any of them. But he loved a joke as  
well as he loved the cause of temperance, so he moved that they  
have one more good drink, and then banish the article forever  
from their meetings. The resolution was adopted, they had a  
merry time over the last drink such at least is the tradition  
and thus they inaugurated the reign of total abstinence. Some  
of our readers may be surprised to find such a specimen of min-  
isterial character among the founders of Amherst College. But  
this genial man and genuine humorist was the first President of  
the Board of Trustees, and was among the most zealous and  
after the laying of the first corner-stone till after the inaugura-  
tion of Dr. Moore, when he resigned and Dr. Moore was chosen  
President of the Board in his stead. Mr. Webster's wisdom  
and prudence were of great service in guiding the early steps  
of the infant Institution, while, at the same time, his reputation  
for learning and integrity contributed not a little to give it char-  
acter before the public.  
 
The name of Noah Webster is known wherever the English  
language is spoken, and we need not dwell upon the events of  
his life. A native of West Hartford ; an alumnus of Yale Col-  
lege of the Class of '78; admitted to the bar in 1781; engaged  
in teaching, compiling school-books, writing essays on political  
and literary subjects, and delivering lectures and publishing dis-  
sertations on the English language till 1789 ; then a lawyer in  
Hartford till 1793 ; editor of a daily and semi-weekly paper,  
afterwards the Commercial Advertiser and the New York Specta-  
tor, till 1798, about the beginning of the present century, he be-  
gan to devote himself entirely to literary and philological pursuits  
in New Haven, Conn. In 1812, finding his resources inadequate  
to the support of his family, he removed to Amherst, where he  
spent ten of the most laborious and fruitful years of his life* on  
his great life-work, the American Dictionary. His spelling-  
book had been published long before, having first appeared in  
 
kind published in the United States, that during the twenty  
years in which he was employed on the Dictionary, the entire  
always had been, deeply interested in popular education and  
public affairs, and was highly esteemed by the people of Am-  
herst. He was often moderator at town meetings. In 1814 he  
was chosen a member of the Legislature, receiving ninety-nine  
out of a hundred votes, and he was the Representative of Am-  
herst in the General Court three years out of six between 1814  
and 1819. In 1816 he received a large majority of the votes of  
Amherst as candidate for Representative to Congress. In 1818,  
he delivered in Northampton the first address before the Hamp-  
shire, Hampden and Franklin Agricultural Society of which he  
was at the same time the Vice-President. In 1819, ''Samuel F.  
Dickinson, Esq., Noah Webster, Esq., and Lieut, Enos Dickin-  
Amherst and the vicinity, with whom he conversed familiarly  
on subjects pertaining to their occupation ; and in haying time,  
he might be seen himself spreading and raking the hay, while  
not unfrequently his daughters, who afterwards married kings  
and became queens in cultivated society, shared with him this  
rural exercise and recreation. His wife and daughters also often  
joined him in his walks, which were his usual exercise. History  
or poetry presents few more beautiful scenes than this scholar  
and sage in the domestic circle. He opened his house often  
every term, it is said to students as well as residents of the  
town. The influence of so genial and so accomplished a family  
was as great as it was happy in the Academy, in the College,  
and in the community. As, in his writings, Mr. Webster in-  
structed all and corrupted none, so his personal influence per-  
vaded all classes of society only to purify and exalt. He gave  
much of his time, which was more valuable than money, to the  
 
1 Church Eecords. Most of the foregoing facts are taken from the records of the  
 
Academy and the College. He wrote many of the early docu-  
ments pertaining to both these Institutions ; and while they show  
the pure taste, good sense and well-balanced mind of Mr. Web-  
ster, it is interesting to observe how fully this distinguished  
philologist sympathized with the most puritanical of the found-  
ers in their religious faith and the fervor of their Christian  
spirit. Webster's Spelling Book is probably the most powerful  
educator of the masses that America has ever produced. His  
Dictionar3 r is, perhaps, beyond any other uninspired book, the  
constant companion, friend and counselor of the educated and  
educating classes. Add to these the. College of which he was  
one of the founders, and which is likely to outlive both the oth-  
ers, and he may well be envied who was able to open so many  
and such fountains of good influence. A conservative in poli-  
tics, a progressive in education, a radical reformer in language,  
and a Puritan in religion, he was a power in his age and country,  
making himself felt as an original and independent thinker, in  
almost every sphere of human thought, and adorning what-  
ever he touched by the purity of his taste, the grace of his man-  
ners and the elevation of his character. The evening of his  
days was serene and tranquil, and his death befitting the close  
of such a life. He died at New Haven on the 28th of May,  
1843, in the eighty-fifth year of his age, leaving as his dying  
tion with the Board of Trustees ceased not long after the death  
of President Moore, and whose biography should, therefore, be  
sketched with that of the first President, we may name Rev.  
Daniel A. Clark, Dr. Rufus Cowles, and Dea. Elisha Billings.  
 
Daniel A. Clark was born in Rahway, N. J., March 1, 1779.  
Wild and wayard in his youth, a sermon of Rev. David Austin  
was the means of his conversion and the commencement of a  
radical change in his life. In 1808 he graduated at Princeton,  
with a high reputation for scholarship. He studied theology at  
Andover whither he went from Newark with Rev. Dr. Griffin,  
and joined the third class formed in the Institution. He was  
 
Southbury, Conn., Amherst, Mass , Bennington, Vt., and Adams,  
N. Y., and preached with great effect in several cities, as at  
Portland, Me., Utica and Troy, N. Y., and Charleston, S. C.  
His pastorates were all of short duration. That at Amherst  
lasted about six years, and this was two years longer than any  
of his other settlements. In the fourth year of his settlement  
in Amherst, charges of various kinds were made against him,  
some of them seriously affecting not only his ministerial but his  
Christian character, and in February, 1824, a council was con-  
vened to consider and decide upon them. The church stood by  
the pastor and remonstrated against his dismission. " The coun-  
cil was one of the ablest and most imposing we have ever wit-  
nessed. There were thronged assemblies and eloquent advo-  
cates and venerable judges." 1 The result was that the pastor  
was acquitted of the several charges, and cordially recommended  
to the churches as an able and faithful minister. Mr. Clark re-  
mained at Amherst some two years after the council, still sus-  
taining the relation of pastor and continuing in the discharge of  
his ministerial duties. But his situation was in many respects  
an undesirable one, and he was quite willing to avail himself of  
the first opportunity which occurred for leaving it. Accordingly,  
in the spring of 1826, he asked a dismission from the church in  
Amherst, and accepted a call from the Congregational Church  
in Bennington, Vt.  
 
The brief continuance of all his pastorates seems to prove  
some want of fitness for the pastoral relation. Wicked men  
were doubtless offended by the boldness, pungency and power  
with which he preached the doctrines of the cross. But he gave  
offence also by his rough and careless manners, and his unmin-  
isterial deportment out of the pulpit. One of his good deacons  
who loved and admired his preaching, used long after to say in  
his homespun style of illustration, that Mr. Clark reminded him  
of one of his cows, the best cow in many respects that he ever  
had, which gave a large pailful of excellent milk, but not un-  
frequently kicked it all over before she had done.  
 
Shortly before his departure from Amherst, Mr. Clark prepared  
and published his first volume of sermons " Conference Ser-  
 
1 Rev. George Shepard, D. D., of the Class of '26.  
 
mons," " to be used in religious meetings, where there is not  
present a gospel minister." This was in 1826. It was the first  
volume that ever issued from the Amherst press. It had a w r ide  
circulation, and exerted a prodigious power. The writer well  
remembers, how it was welcomed by the deacons of the church in  
his native place in north-eastern Pennsylvania, how the sermons  
were read in " deacons' meetings," and how even under such dis-  
advantages they stirred the people like the voice of a trumpet.  
 
While residing with his children in the city of New York, he  
prepared for the press three volumes of sermons which were  
published in 1835 and 1836. In 1846, the " complete works "  
of Mr. Clark were published in two volumes, together with a  
biographical sketch and an estimate of his powers as a preacher,  
by Rev. George Shepard, D. D., Professor of Sacred Rhetoric  
in Bangor Theological Seminary. Prof. Shepard estimates his  
power as a preacher very high. " Mr. Clark's person, voice and  
entire manner were in perfect keeping with his style ; a large  
masculine frame, a voice harsh, strong, capable of great volume,  
though not very flexible, an action for the most part ungraceful  
but significant and natural, a countenance bearing bold, strongly-  
marked features at every opening of which the waked and work-  
ing passions looked intensely out ; then thoughts and sentences  
such as we find in these volumes coming forth, all together gave  
the idea of huge, gigantic power. We were reminded often  
of some great ordnance, throwing terribly its heavy shots."  
Prof. Shepard had the advantage of hearing the sermons from  
the lips of the preacher himself. But no one can read his  
"Church Safe," 1 preached before the Consociation at Water-  
town, or his " Plea for a Miserable World," delivered at the lay-  
ing of the corner-stone at Amherst, or any of several sermons  
printed in the National Preacher, or indeed any one of the ser-  
mons in his complete works, without admitting the essential  
justice of this estimate, without feeling not only that Mr. Clark  
was one of the most powerful preachers, but that his sermons  
 
Mr. Clark entered with characteristic zeal and earnestness  
into the work of laying the foundations of Amherst College,  
pleaded its cause in the pulpit and with his pen, and spent some  
time in traveling and collecting funds for its permanent estab-  
lishment. He died in great tranquillity March 3, 1840, of an  
ossification of the arteries of the brain.  
 
Rufus Cowles was born in Amherst, December 16, 1767 ;  
graduated at Dartmouth College in 1792 ; practiced medicine in  
New Salem and Amherst for several years, and then was en-  
gaged in mercantile business in the latter place till the time of  
his death which occurred November 22, 1837, at the age of sev-  
enty. He had a large landed property in Amherst, and sub-  
scribed to the Charity Fund a tract of land in Maine which was  
.estimated at three thousand dollars. Some of the early alumni  
remember him as among the first to meet students on their ar-  
rival in town and give them a cordial welcome, assuring them  
that Amherst was a remarkably healthy place, as was demon-  
strated by the fact that he had not lost a patient for so many  
years ! His connection with the Board of Trustees ceased with  
the obtaining of the charter in 1825.  
 
Elisha Billings was born in Sunderland, October 1, 1749. He  
held a high rank as a scholar in Yale College where he was  
graduated in 1772, and delivered the valedictory oration at Com-  
mencement. After suitable preparatory studies he was licensed  
to preach the gospel in 1775. But soon after he commenced  
preaching, his health failed, and he spent the remainder of his  
life as a highly respected farmer in Conway, at the same time  
taking a leading part in the church of which he was a member  
and an officer, and making his influence felt in the educational  
and religious institutions of the county. He was a Director  
of the Hampshire Education and Missionary Societies, and a  
Trustee of Sanderson Academy and Amherst College. Dr.  
Hitchcock who was for some years his pastor, says : " His clear  
views of religious doctrines and inflexible adherence to the faith  
of the Puritans made him the steadfast friend of every effort to  
defend and propagate the gospel of Christ. His support of the  
 
prayers and wise and encouraging counsels were most efficient  
elements of final success. He had not abundant means, but  
did what he could as to pecuniary aid. Indeed so liberal were  
his benefactions as exceedingly to embarrass his widow and  
children. But they, too, endowed with the same spirit, strug-  
gled through their pecuniary embarrassments. When the effort  
was being made to raise fifty thousand dollars to start the Col-  
lege, Mrs. Billings circulated the life of Franke so widely that  
the copy was worn out. She believed and so did all the men  
and women who founded Amherst College, that the principles  
adopted and acted upon by Franke as to trust in God and the  
power of prayer, were scriptural ; and such essentially, let it  
always be remembered, were the principles on which Amherst  
College was founded. The type of the piety of its originators  
weeks before the first annual meeting of the Trustees under  
the charter. He lived to see the College in which he felt so  
much interest incorporated, but never attended a meeting after  
the incorporation. His excellent wife, Mary (Storrs) Billings,  
daughter of Rev. John Storrs of Southold, Long Island, sister  
of Rev. Richard Storrs, of Longmeadow, and aunt of Rev.  
of Amherst College, were Col. Rufus Graves, Hon. Samuel  
Fowler Dickinson and Hezekiah Wright Strong, Esq. And of  
these, Col. Graves was emphatically the agent of the Institution  
in its early years.  
 
Rufus Graves was born in Sunderland, September 27, 1758.  
He was a graduate of Dartmouth College of the Class of '91.  
Under the administration of John Adams (1797-1801) he re-  
ceived a commission as Colonel of a regiment which was raised  
in this section when fears were entertained of a French war,  
and thus obtained the military title by which he has ever since  
been usually known. In 1812 he was lecturer on chemistry in  
 
1 Reminiscences of Amherst College, p. 7.  
8  
 
the College where he was graduated. But experiments in chem-  
istry were not his only nor his most brilliant experiments. For  
several years of his life, during which he lived for the most  
part in Leverett, he was chiefly remarkable for bold and grand  
schemes of business, which were too large for his resources, and  
so turned out failures. He tried his hand at sheep-farming, at  
fruit-growing, at a tannery in Leverett, and a tide-mill in Bos-  
ton, with the same result. He planted the best orchard in Frank-  
lin County, but it did not pay the expense. He had the best  
flock of fine-wool Merino sheep, the best herd of cows, and the  
best stock of the best breed of pigs in this part of the Connec-  
to Amherst. The church records under date of November 14,  
1817, contain this entry : " Received Rufus Graves and wife to  
communion by letter." He was for some years a deacon in the  
village church. His first residence in Amherst was in the second  
story of the Academy building, where he boarded a large num-  
ber of the students, while at the same time he lectured to them  
on chemistry in an extemporized laboratory in the basement.  
Subsequently he built the house near by, now owned by Mr. J.  
S. Adams. Col. Graves was the first lecturer on chemistry in  
the Amherst Collegiate Institution. This was in the first year  
of its existence. His lectures were delivered in a private room  
in the old South College, which was not only an earlier but a  
humbler and ruder laboratory than even the upper room or hall  
in the North College that was afterwards used in rotation for  
morning and evening prayers and for lectures on the physical  
sciences. And from anecdotes which have been transmitted, we  
infer that the lectures were as homely and primitive as the ap-  
paratus and the laboratory. He was deeply interested in the  
religious welfare of the students, and took an active and leading  
part in the prayer-meetings of the Academy and the village  
church, which were all then held in the lower room of the Acad-  
emy building. He often opened his own house for private and  
special meetings for prayer. The writer attended one or two  
meetings of this sort when he was a member of College, and he  
 
well remembers the faith and fervor with which he prayed. He  
always prayed many who knew him have remarked it as if he  
were talking with God face to face. None doubted that he daily  
walked with God. Faith and works, prayer to God and impor-  
tunity with men, went hand in hand in his labors for the estab-  
lishment of the College.  
 
He entered into this work with all his heart and labored in it  
for years with all his might ; for now he had found an object  
great enough for his enterprise, and at the same time good  
enough for his benevolence, and the fervor of his piety now con-  
spired with the ardor of his temperament and the hopefulness  
of his natural disposition to set him all on fire in the under-  
taking.  
 
It will be remembered that the first project was merely an en-  
largement of Amherst Academy by the endowment of a profess-  
orship of languages. This plan was projected by Col. Graves.  
The resolutions were drawn up by him, and, at his motion, unan-  
imously adopted by the Trustees of the Academy, and he was ap-  
pointed their agent to carry them into execution. He spent many  
months, chiefly in Boston and vicinity, in soliciting donations for  
this object, but with little success. Returning home at length,  
discouraged though not in despair, he was convinced by Esq.  
Dickinson that his object was too small to awaken public inter-  
est, and that if he would succeed, he must found a College.  
Col. Graves was not slow to entertain an idea so suited to his  
own cast of mind. He embraced it eagerly. He drew up the  
constitution and by-laws as the basis not only of a Charity Fund,  
but of a charitable Collegiate Institution. This plan was adop-  
ted by the Trustees with equal unanimity and still greater en-  
thusiasm. Committees were appointed to guide and aid in so-  
liciting donations. Indeed it was understood that they were to  
be a committee of the whole for the purpose of raising money.  
But Col. Graves was still the principal agent. He devoted his  
whole time and strength to the work. He went to every part  
of the State, buttonholing wealthy and benevolent individuals,  
and not a few who were not wealthy nor benevolent, inviting,  
 
arid in about a year from the commencement the subscription  
of fifty thousand dollars was completed. The subscription of  
thirty thousand dollars, which soon followed, was.a work of still  
greater difficulty, because the ground had already been pretty  
thoroughly burnt over, and it was necessary to raise it in smaller  
sums. Subscriptions were taken from mite societies and chil-  
dren's societies, and many of these did not exceed five cents,  
while very few of them exceeded five dollars. In this subscrip-  
tion, too, Col. Graves was still an everywhere-present and uni-  
formly successful agent. When the subscriptions were filled,  
there still remained the scarcely less laborious task of collecting  
them. This also devolved more or less on the same indefatiga-  
ble agent. Col. Graves was also eminently active and success-  
ful in soliciting donations in money and in kind for erecting  
all the early buildings. Regarding the silver and the gold,  
the stone and the brick, the corn and the provisions as the  
Lord's, and Amherst College as unquestionably the Lord's Insti-  
tution, he was often in the habit of going to good people every-  
where and saying, the Lord hath need of this or that, and  
usually it was forthcoming immediately. Thus he traversed  
the State from year to year, visiting many portions of it repeat-  
edly, till he became as well known to ministers and Christians  
generally as any veteran agent or district secretary of our own  
day ; * and twenty-five years ago there was scarcely a town in  
which racy anecdotes were not told of his sayings and doings,  
seasoned with lively descriptions of his peculiar person and man-  
ners. Sometimes he would return from these excursions with  
very little money for the College and none for himself, with  
worn-out shoes and coat out at the elbows, to find his family  
suffering for the conveniences if not the necessaries of life, but  
with inexhaustible faith and hope and patience, after patching  
up himself and the homestead, and having refreshed his own  
himself, and even after he had passed into the hands of another owner, he was as  
persistent in calling at every door as his old master was in levying a contribution  
on every individual.  
 
brain, and some of his cooler neighbors really believed he was  
beside himself. Calling one day on Simeon Strong, Esq., son  
of Judge Strong, who was thought to be going down to the  
grave with an incurable disease, he found him in what appeared  
to him a state of morbid, almost preternatural cheerfulness ; and  
meeting Dr. Cutler shortly after, he asked him if Esq. Strong  
was not deranged, or at least losing the balance of his faculties.  
The Doctor went almost immediately to call on his patient ; and  
scarcely had he passed the ordinary compliments of the sick  
room, when Esq. Strong said : " I have just received a visit  
from Col. Graves ; and Doctor, don't you think he is losing his  
balance ? It seems to me he is deranged he talks and thinks  
of nothing but Amherst College." Though near neighbors,  
their temperaments were so diametrically opposite, that each  
pronounced the other crazy.  
 
There is much more than a picture of the imagination in the  
following lively sketch by an early graduate. 1 "I see an old  
man, poor and humble, but yet a kind of ironsides who consid-  
ered that in the midst of wide-spread defection from the faith  
of the fathers, there should be a College erected to the Lord a  
kind of Puritan, Calvanistic College for the education of the  
Lord's anointed and the upholding of His kingdom, and that this  
should be done in the heart of Massachusetts ; I see him on a  
sort of crusade among the faithful, homely clergy and laymen of  
the Connecticut Valley, urging upon them to build a College to  
the Lord, and that Amherst must be the place for its erection.  
I see the foundations of the College laid amid the prayers and  
tears and praises and contributions of the poor and humble who  
felt that it was the Lord's work. > I see the relays of men coming  
in from the towns about to work up by their daily labor the con-  
tributions of materials which other towns had made to the com-  
mon cause. I see the loads of provisions sent in by the pious  
farmers and inhabitants, far and near, for the support of the  
bands of workmen, who, in giving the labor of their hands,  
gave their all. I see old Dea. Graves Prof. Graves traveling  
about in Hadley and Hatfield and Sunderland and Whately,  
and Belchertown and Enfield and other towns, and telling the  
 
people that the Lord is in want of supplies, and asking if they  
could not spare a barrel of beef or a barrel of pork for those  
who were building a College for the Lord. And then, when  
money was wanted, Dea. Graves was the man tq scour the coun-  
try and replenish the treasury of the Lord. Then comes that  
most characteristic and most remarkable scene, when upon a re-  
turn of the good Deacon from an unsuccessful begging excur-  
sion, a meeting is called to hear his report. A chairman is  
chosen and the question is put, " Well, Dea. Graves, what suc-  
cess ? How much money have you raised ? the Deacon rising  
solemnly says, 'Not one cent. Brethren, let us pray.' This last  
exclamation should be the motto of the College forever. It is,  
in itself, an epitome of the whole early history and mission of  
Amherst College. Poverty and prayer ! Labor and faith ! The  
mission of the College is to educate for the Lord the poor and  
the pious, and to vindicate and champion the honest old New  
England Primer faith of our fathers."  
 
Mrs. Graves, a daughter of Dea. Graves of Leverett, was a  
woman of rare excellence, who heartily sympathized with her  
husband in his religious faith and co-operated with him in his  
self-denying work, while she did what she could to check his  
tendency to extremes. His children too, labored with their own  
hands to meet the necessities of the family while at the same  
time they availed themselves of the opportunities which Amherst  
afforded for education. His oldest son is a Christian physician  
in Northern New York. Another son, Rev. F. W. Graves of  
the Class of '25, was an able and eloquent preacher, especially  
in revivals, and died in 1864, after having turned many to right-  
eousness. His daughters married ministers, home missionaries,  
pioneers, like their father, in the work of education and religion.  
Following his children in their westward course, Col. Graves  
left Amherst in 1834, and took up his residence in Portsmouth,  
Ohio, where he died February 12, 1845, after an illness of a few  
da,ys at the age of eighty-six. He had been married fifty years.  
Next to the Bible, the favorite reading of his old age was the  
Missionary Herald which he read through every month as long  
as he was able to read at all.  
 
1775. His father Nathan Dickinson, was a farmer in East  
Amherst. His mother, Esther Fowler, was from Westchester,  
Conn. Samuel Fowler was the youngest son. He fitted for  
College with Judge Strong of Amherst, entered Dartmouth Col-  
lege at sixteen, and graduated in 1795 at the age o'f twenty.  
New Salem. About this time he had a severe sickness, which  
was the means of his conversion. He soon united with the  
West Parish Church and at twenty-one he was chosen one of  
its deacons an office which he held nearly forty years. Think-  
ing to enter the ministry he began the study of theology with  
an older brother, Rev. Timothy Dickinson of Holliston, Mass.  
But finding that he needed a more active life, he turned his  
attention to the legal profession. Returning to Araherst, he  
completed the usual term of study in the office of Judge Strong,  
clerk of Amherst. He was frequently employed as the agent  
and advocate of the town in litigated questions. In 1827, he  
was chosen Representative of the town in the General Court.  
He was subsequently a member of the Massachusetts Senate.  
 
Being an educated man and an officer in the church, he was  
very best lawyer in Hampshire" County, and might doubtless  
have had a seat on the bench, if he had continued in the prac-  
tice of his profession. But he was gradually drawn off into  
business for which he had a natural fondness ; and he was still  
more deeply enlisted in the educational enterprises, to which he  
was strongly impelled at once by his cultivated mind, his rare  
public spirit, and his high moral and religious earnestness.  
Having a large family of his own to educate and at the same  
time having at heart the general welfare, he, with a few others,  
 
nished it with apparatus and other endowments, liberal for those  
times, sought far and near the ablest teachers that could be  
found, and spared neither time nor money to make it the best  
institution of the kind in the Commonwealth. Young men  
also who were in straitened circumstances and making earnest  
effort to get an education, were sure to receive from him en-  
couragement and assistance. When the removal of Williams  
College began to be talked of, he at once entered into the plan  
with all the energy of his nature. Among the Trustees of that  
Institution who felt the necessity of its removal were his class-  
mate, Dr. Snell, and his college friend, Dr. Packard. He agreed  
with them and many others that an Institution more central  
than Harvard or Williams was needed, where the sons of evan-  
gelical Christians could be educated in good learning and at  
the same time in the faith of their fathers, and where those  
whose means were limited, might be educated at less expense,  
and, if necessary, be aided in their preparation for the gospel  
ministry. The conversion of the world often pressed heavily  
on his mind. He saw in the Institution contemplated at Am-  
herst, one of the agencies that would surely hasten that prom-  
ised event, and he felt that in rearing and sustaining it, he  
was as certainly fulfilling the command to "preach the gospel  
to every creature," as if he had himself gone in person to the  
heathen.  
 
The enlargement of the plan from a mere Professorship in  
Amherst Academy into a separate Collegiate Institution was  
expressly owing to Mr. Dickinson's suggestion and influence.  
Nor was the successful execution of the plan less dependent on  
his steadfastness and perseverance, on the self-sacrificing devo-  
tion of his time, property and personal service. If Col. Graves  
was the locomotive, Esq. Dickinson was the engineer of the  
train. If Col. Graves was the hand, Esq. Dickinson was the  
head in the founding and rearing of Amherst College. It is  
doubtful if the College would ever have been built without  
 
together often for prayer and consultation as to how the object  
could be accomplished. Nearly a whole week sometimes, would  
be thus spent. When it was decided to go forward and there  
were funds enough collected to begin the foundations of the  
first building, and the corner-stone was laid, the effort was only  
begun As the work proceeded and they had used up all their  
available means, then he (Mr. Dickinson,) would pledge his pri-  
vate property to the bank to obtain money that the work might  
go on. And when there was no money to pay for the teams to  
draw the brick or men to drive them, his own horses were sent  
for days and weeks till in one season two or three of them fell  
by the wayside. Sometimes his own laborers were sent to drive  
his horses, and in an emergency he went himself, rather than  
that the work should cease." At the same time, he boarded  
more or less of the workmen, and sometimes paid their wages  
out of his own pocket, while his wife and daughters toiled to  
board them With all the zeal and efforts of numerous friends  
and benefactors, the work would often have stopped, had he  
not pledged his property till the money could be raised. His  
own means at last began to fail. His business which was so  
large as to require all his time and care, suffered from his devo-  
tion to the public. He became embarrassed and at length actu-  
ally poor. And in his poverty he had the additional grief of  
feeling that his services were forgotten, like the poor wise man  
in the proverb who " by his wisdom delivered the city, yet no  
man remembered that same poor man."  
 
When Lane Seminary went into operation he was offered a  
situation as Steward, with the oversight and general manage-  
ment of the grounds. He accepted it, and remained at Cincin-  
nati endeavoring to bring order out of confusion and impart  
something of New England comfort and thrift to what was then  
western life. Having received the offer of a similar situation in  
connection with the Western Reserve College with the promise  
of a better support, he removed to Hudson, Ohio. After a year  
of great labor and many discouragements, he died at Hudson,  
April 22, 1838, at the age of sixty-two, in the full possession of  
his faculties and in the precious hope of rest and reward in  
 
sons and buried in the cemetery at Amherst, where he now lies  
by the side of the wife of his youth, amid the graves of his  
relatives and friends, and within sight of the College which he  
so loved and cherished and to which he devoted so many years  
of his life.  
 
Hezekiah Wright Strong continued to hold the office of Over-  
seer of the Charity Fund until 1846, and according to the usual  
plan of this work, the sketch of his life belongs properly to a  
later period in the history. But he was so intimately associated  
with Col. Graves and Esq. Dickinson, and so manifestly de-  
serves to rank with them among " the first three " working  
founders of Amherst College, that I shall anticipate and briefly  
sketch his life here. He was the son of Hon. Simeon Strong,  
Judge of the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of Massa-  
chusetts, and was born in Amherst, December 24, 1768. He  
studied law in his father's office, and commenced the practice  
of his profession in Deerfield. But he returned to Amherst in  
season to be one of the founders of Amherst Academy, of which  
he sometimes playfully remarks that he was the father, and  
thus the grandfather if he was not also the father of Amherst  
College. When the removal of Williams College began to be  
agitated, he made up his mind, in common with others here and  
elsewhere, that it must come to Amherst. And with an ardor  
and promptness in carrying his thoughts into execution which  
was characteristic of the man, he went up to " the meeting-  
house hill," examined the ground and selected that place for  
the site of the College. He then called on Col. Graves and re-  
quested him to look it over with him, and there, one moonlight  
night, those two men measured the ground and marked the spot  
for the first building. Thus Amherst College had " a local hab-  
itation," for the first time, perhaps, in the mind of Mr. Strong,  
and he and Col. Graves set the first stake for " the School of the  
Prophets." And then those three zealous, earnest, enthusiastic,  
not to say visionary Christian men, Mr. Strong, Col. Graves arid  
Esq. Dickinson, went to their pastor and other ministers, to  
their brethren in the church and their neighbors generally,  
saying in the language of the sons of the prophets to Elisha,  
 
beam and let us make there a place for the sons of the prophets  
where they may dwell. And they did so. And thus that sub-  
stantial building of brick and mortar went up very much in the  
same way and almost as rapidly as that rude and primitive dwell-  
ing for Elisha and his pupils went up on the banks of the Jor-  
dan. 1 Which of these three men originated the idea of vol-  
untary contributions of labor and material for the erection of  
this building, or whether it sprung up simultaneously in the  
minds of many, and which of the three labored the most assid-  
uously in raising the Charity Fund and made the greatest sacri-  
fices in the early establishment of the College, is a question  
which has been much discussed but need not be answered.  
They all did what they could. They all devoted their time,  
sacrificed their property, and impoverished their families, not  
first ice-house and the first bathing-house in Amherst were built  
by him. The first Congress water that was brought to Amherst  
was introduced by him. A two-horse team, with empty barrels,  
was sent to Ballston and Saratoga, the barrels were filled from  
the springs and the water brought to Amherst where it was bot-  
tled for sale. But the demand was far from being equal to the  
supply. He was in advance of his age. This may be said of not  
a few of the founders of Amherst College. Mr. Webster ad-  
vocated many a political and social reform or new measures in  
anticipation of his contemporaries. And Rev. Daniel A. Clark,  
Hon. S. F. Dickinson, Col. Rufus Graves and H. Wright Strong,  
Esq., were all similarly constituted were all full of new ideas  
and enterprises were all men of ardent temperament and strong  
faith, and thus fitted to be pioneers of reform and progress.  
Otherwise they never would have founded Amherst College.  
 
Mr. Strong cultivated the primitive grace of hospitality, and  
opened his house most freely for the entertainment of strangers  
 
One of these, Henry Wright Strong, entered when he was only  
ten years and eight months old, and graduated when he was  
fourteen. He was afterwards one of the brightest ornaments  
of the bar at Troy, N. Y., and a member of the New York Sen-  
ate. Through the influence of Hon. Samuel C. Allen, Mr.  
Strong obtained the appointment of Postmaster in Amherst,  
and with the support of his son-in-law, Mr. McConihe of Troy,  
held it through several successive administrations. We can  
scarcely refrain from noticing how many of the founders of the  
College received their reward for their services to the cause of  
education in the prosperity and filial piety of their well-educated  
founders of Amherst College, which, if drawn out into particu-  
lars, would form an instructive and moving tale. Or rather here  
is an unwritten history of toils and sufferings, self-denials and  
sacrifices for the public good which is worthy of a place in the  
Book of Heroes and Martyrs. Nay, their lives, if written, would  
read not a little like the lives of those Old Testament saints  
whom the apostle enrolls as examples of faith in the eleventh  
chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews not perfect any more  
than they were, unsymmetrical perhaps and unfinished as they  
were, rugged and rough, it may be, like some of the old prophets  
and judges, but, like them, strong in faith and therefore valiant  
in fight, mighty in endurance, heroic in good deeds, almost  
prophetic in their confident anticipation of a triumphant issue  
to their apparently hopeless undertaking. Nor was this spirit  
confined to the leaders. It pervaded the rank and file. It in-  
spired the men, women and children of Amherst. Not that we  
suppose they were all influenced solely by Christian motives;  
perhaps none of them were free from the influence of local con-  
siderations and personal interests. But they were all ready to  
deny themselves and sacrifice the present for the future, the  
lower for the higher good. And very many of all ages and both  
sexes, we doubt not, devoted their time and toil and property  
and reputation to the work in the very spirit of missionaries,  
for the defence of the truth, for the propagation of a pure faith,  
 
for the conversion of the world, and for the honor of their Divine  
Redeemer. Time would fail me to enumerate those who were  
never Trustees or Overseers of the Fund, and who never re-  
ceived any public recognition of their services. There was Col.  
Elijah Dickinson, who gave the land on which the earliest Col-  
lege buildings were all erected, but who died before the corner-  
stone of one was laid. There was John Eastman, 1 who gave a  
thousand dollars to the Charity Fund, and five hundred to the  
thirty thousand dollars subscription, when his whole estate did  
not exceed ten or twelve thousand dollars. There were John  
Leland, Calvin Merrill, Jarib White, 2 and Joseph Church, Jr.,  
who joined with Dr. Parsons, H. Wright Strong and Samuel F.  
Dickinson in signing the subsidiary bond and thus made them-  
selves responsible jointly and severally for the sum of fifteen  
establishment of Amherst College," says President Humphrey 3  
" God had been raising up and qualifying agents altogether  
unconsciously to themselves, to take the lead in the enterprise.  
And in looking over the whole ground I have no hesitation in  
putting the name of Rufus Graves first. He was an educated  
man of a remarkably sanguine temperament. He poured his  
whole soul into whatever he undertook, and made light of ob-  
stacles which in the very beginning would have discouraged any  
other man. As he proceeded in circulating the subscription, it  
absorbed his whole mind. It became a perfect passion with him.  
It may almost be said that he thought and talked of nothing  
else. So entirely was he devoted to this one object, that for  
Eastman, and of Rev. David Eastman of the Class of '35.  
 
2 Father of Mrs. President Hitchcock.  
 
8 In a manuscript which he prepared at the request of the Trustees to aid in  
furnishing materials for a history.  
 
4 The amount of time is left blank in the manuscript. It was a little less than a  
year after the adoption of the constitution, that this subscription was completed.  
 
succeeded at last in raising the subscription with a responsible  
guarantee to fifty thousand dollars. This, it was believed, no  
cuted the enterprise without the checks and balances of cooler  
heads. Such men also God had raised up to carry forward the  
undertaking. They were men of faith and prayer. They were  
such men as Noah Webster, Samuel F. Dickinson, Nathaniel  
Smith, Rev John Fiske, Rev. Thomas Snell, Rev. Joshua Crosby,  
Rev. Theophilus Packard, John Leland all good men and true  
with others of like precious faith. 1 I have (with common  
consent I believe) placed Col. Graves at the head of the list.  
And from all the information I can get, Mr. Dickinson is enti-  
tled to stand next as his intimate adviser and helper. Although  
ardent, enterprising and hopeful himself in an eminent degree,  
he was such a cool and reliable adviser as Col. Graves needed,  
 
