CHAPTER XXI.  
 
RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF THE COLLEGE DURING THIS PERIOD.  
 
THE Inaugural of President Stearns gives utterance to senti-  
ments of orthodoxy and earnest piety with a clearness and force  
which show that he does not in this respect fall below the stand-  
ard of his predecessors. " The highest style of man," he says in  
the concluding paragraph of this address, " can not be produced  
without religion. In unrenewed minds there is a total deficiency  
of that element which constitutes the crowning glory of man, his  
inward, spiritual life. It is the result of a spiritual birth, and its  
consequence is a new spiritual existence. It is as much superior  
to mere reason as reason is to mere animal life. It is supernat-  
ural and makes the subjects of it sons of God. It was lost by the  
apostasy and can be restored only through Christ. Let it first  
be secured in him, and then developed in all the beautiful pro-  
portions of his fullness. Without it the Scriptures speak truly  
of man when they say, he is dead. The highest attribute of  
humanity, that which links him to the Divine, is extinct within  
him  
 
" This branch of our subject has much to do with education in a  
Christian College. We are to aim at producing the highest possi-  
ble order of men. They must therefore be men mighty in God,  
actuated by the purest religious motives, laboriously beneficent  
men, self-denying men, having something of that grandeur of  
spirit which was so overpowering in the old prophets, united with  
that irresistible might of lowliness which shone in the apostle  
John. It is to be our aim that they should go forth anointed with  
the Holy Ghost, as it were, under a new dispensation of devot-  
edness to Christ, that by them his universal reign may be hast-  
ened on."  
 
After speaking of the purpose for which Amherst College was  
founded to be a school of and for Christ, and of the tendency to  
religious degeneracy in great literary institutions, he thus con-  
cludes this topic : " The future religious condition of this Col-  
lege is a subject on which I am burdened with a sense of responsi-  
bility. As a Christian parent would esteem it the last of mis-  
fortunes to be the occasion of giving existence to a person who  
should devote himself to a life of hostility to Christ, however  
elegant and classical and hidden the form of hostility might be,  
so if I were to aid, however unintentionally, in forming of the  
sons of Amherst in my day or in any coming generation, an en-  
ginery against the Church, I should not only consider my life here  
a failure but would curse the day of my inauguration to the end  
of tima. Yes ! verily I should esteem it a calamity more dread-  
ful than death, if, through any fault of mine, this College should  
receive a poise, even to the breadth of a hair towards the tran-  
scendental atheism of the age. I would not be the means of  
assisting to qualify minds, by high courses of learning, to exer-  
cise a more efficient, though perhaps a more covert agency, in un-  
dermining the faith of the community, no, not for all the honors  
man ever heaped on a mortal. Pardon me, then, if I say ear-  
nestly to the alumni and all the friends of the College, brethren,  
pray for us."  
 
Sixteen years later, President Stearns concludes his address  
at the opening of Walker Hall in a strain of similar religious  
earnestness : " It (the doctrine of the discourse) would leave out  
whatever may be obsolete or defective ; but one thing, in conclu-  
sion, it would not leave out. Whatever changes or revolutions the  
College may accept, moral supervision and Christian influence  
should never be left out of it, or degraded to a secondary posi-  
tion in it Our old Colleges were founded for Christian  
 
education, manhood and usefulness. Even the mottoes and de-  
vices of the College seals testify to this Our own College  
 
exhibits on its seal an open Bible, with a full-orbed unclouded  
sun pouring down upon its pages, and the words beneath it,  
 
sert it, and its spirit become antagonistic to its seal, may the Al-  
mighty send his thunderbolts and destroy it ! This is my prayer.  
No, He who founded it, will preserve it, and the long procession  
of its sous, for many centuries to come, with the open Bible and  
the light shining full from heaven upon it, shall powerfully help  
to irradiate the world."  
 
In connection with the election of Dr. Stearns to the presi-  
dency, it was voted by the Trustees, that " the President be in-  
stalled Pastor of the College Church, and that he be responsible  
for the supply of the pulpit one-half of the time, and the Pro-  
fessors the other half." This arrangement continued a few years.  
The President preached in the College Chapel every other Sab-  
bath, and on the alternate Sabbaths the clerical Professors  
preached in rotation. But the President at length found so fre-  
quent a supply of the pulpit too heavy a burden to be borne,  
with all the other duties that devolved upon him, just as Dr.  
Humphrey had done before him, and he was relieved in the same  
way, by the Professors voluntarily consenting to share the labors  
of the pulpit equally with him. For some time, as the students  
of that day will well remember, President Stearns wore the  
clerical or University gown in the ordinary services of the  
Sabbath. But this was generally felt to be more suitable to  
Cambridge and the neighborhood of Boston, than to Amherst  
and the valley of the Connecticut. The Doctor himself grad-  
ually came to the same feeling, and, without anything ever  
being said on the subject, dispensed with its use, except in the  
delivery of the Baccalaureate and on Commencement day, or  
on state occasions.  
 
Three or four years after entering upon the duties of his office,  
Dr. Stearns introduced a prayer - meeting on Sunday evening  
which soon superseded the old Sunday morning meeting, and  
which, being better attended by. the students than the morning  
meeting had been, and being attended also by the Faculty, has  
become a power for good in the College. This was connected,  
partly as effect and partly as cause, with a change gradual but  
at length entire in the habits of the students in regard to study-  
 
land, especially in the Connecticut Valley. Under the first two  
Presidents, the practice was almost or quite universal of consid-  
ering Saturday evening a part of the Sabbath, according to Jew-  
ish custom, and on Sabbath evening preparing the lesson for  
Monday morning, reading secular books, or engaging in any other  
worldly occupation. So if you had gone into the houses of any  
of the older members of the Faculty or of the pastor or deacons  
of the village church, you would have found their wives and  
daughters knitting, or perchance sewing just as on any other  
evening of the week. Often have we seen good Mrs. Hum-  
phrey and her daughters thus employed Sabbath evening. Un-  
der the third President, a change was going on in these respects  
in the College as in the community around, which has culmina-  
ted under the fourth and left Sabbath evening free from secular  
occupations and the most favorable evening in the week for a  
prayer-meeting. The Class prayer-meetings which during the  
first quarter century used to be held on Friday evening, have  
also been transferred to Saturday evening with a manifest gain  
in attendance and in freedom from secular engagements. In  
order to facilitate the attendance at these meetings on Saturday  
and Sunday evenings, and at the same time to remove all tempta-  
tion to study on the Lord's day, so far as possible, the Class exer-  
cise on Monday morning is a lecture, or some exercise which  
does not require preparation.  
 
One object of the President in introducing the Sunday even-  
ing prayer-meeting was to bring the officers and students to-  
gether once a week for prayer and religious conference, and to  
break down as much as possible in religious matters the sepa-  
rating wall between them. This was as difficult as it was de-  
sirable ; for hitherto there had been no stated weekly meeting  
where officers and students were accustomed to come together;  
and in those occasional meetings, where they did meet, such as  
the monthly missionary concert and special meetings for prayer  
and exhortation in times of revival, the students rarely took  
any active part. President Hitchcock's Monday evening meet-  
ings at his own house had done much to bring the Christian  
students into a fraternal or filial relation and feeling towards  
 
dents took part with a good degree of freedom. It was another  
thing for them to meet with the whole Faculty in the small  
chapel, and lead in prayer, and express their views and feelings  
on the same level with their instructors. But the great revival  
in 1858 melted down the middle wall of partition and brought  
teachers and pupils to feel that they were indeed all one family,  
and to converse and pray together as brethren. And although  
of course there is not the same unity of spirit in times of de-  
College itself, was sustained as a lecture, by the President and  
the clerical Professors lecturing or preaching in rotation, until  
two or three years ago (1869 I think it was), when the better  
attendance and greater interest of the Sunday evening prayer-  
meeting suggested that it might be well to try the experiment of  
changing that into a meeting in which the students might di-  
rectly participate. The experiment was tried, and although a  
longing is sometimes felt by some, both of the Faculty and the  
students, for the pungent preaching, in times of revival, and the  
solid instruction at all times, of such lectures as we used to hear  
on Thursday evening, yet on the whole neither officers nor stu-  
dents would choose to return to the old way. In order to make  
a difference between this and the Sunday evening meeting, and  
also to secure at once variety and method, instruction and im-  
pression from week to week, a subject is always given out the  
previous week, and the President or some other member of the  
Faculty usually opens with a few remarks, perhaps of a more di-  
dactic kind and better considered than could be expected without  
any such plan. Then the meeting is open for entire freedom  
in prayer, remarks, singing, or any other voluntary exercise to  
which any brother may feel himself moved by the Spirit or the  
occasion. Sometimes we have taken up the Sermon on the  
Mount, the Lord's Prayer, or the Parables in regular order.  
Often we have discussed the plainest and most practical ques-  
tions concerning the Church, the religious life and the relations  
and duties of Christians in College, not excepting even the ques-  
tion how we may best conduct our religious meetings. Some-  
 
times we have had what we call a Promise Meeting, in which  
any and every brother is invited to repeat from the Scriptures  
any promise that may be of special interest in his own experi-  
ence, with a brief word of remark, if he choose, in addition.  
Sometimes we have set apart a meeting in like manner for  
Scripture exhortations. These meetings, thus conducted, have  
usually been free, instructive, edifying and interesting to a de-  
gree which, twenty years ago, I would have thought quite im-  
possible in a promiscuous meeting of officers and students in a  
New England College. And if we have been able in Amherst  
College to establish a friendly relation and gain a personal in-  
fluence with students beyond what exists in most of the New  
England colleges and beyond what used to exist here, it is  
owing njjt a little to such religious meetings, together with other  
corresponding efforts to remove the barriers which were once an  
almost impassable gulf between the government and the gov-  
erned in these Institutions.  
 
During the first twelve years of Dr. Stearns' presidency there  
were seven seasons of special religious interest such as we are  
accustomed to call revivals, thus averaging more than one for  
every two years. At no time during this period, was there an  
interval of more than two years without such a season, and in  
one instance two successive years were thus blessed. Since  
1866, revivals have been less frequent and less powerful in Am-  
herst as, we regret to say, thay have been also in other colleges  
and in the churches ; though they have by no means ceased,. and  
no class has graduated, even in this period, without at least one  
such time of refreshing and of awakening and conversion to  
more or less out of the church.  
 
The years 1855, 1857, 1858, 1860, 1862, 1864, 1866, and 1870  
have usually been reckoned as years of revival, although there  
is no very broad line of demarcation between some of these years  
and some of those that are not so reckoned ; for there is not one  
of these latter years in which there was not some quickening in  
the winter term, and I believe none in which there were not in  
the course of the year some hopeful conversions.  
 
The following account of the revival in the winter and spring  
of 1855 is furnished by one who was a member of the then Senior  
 
Class, l and is the more reliable because it is based on a journal  
kept at the time.  
 
" If I can judge from my journal, the spiritual state of the  
College in 1853-4 was pretty well typified by an incident which  
occurred in the Sophomore prayer-meeting. It was in charge  
of a man who is now an editor of a most influential New  
York paper. Early in the meeting, he went sound asleep, and  
only woke up after the meeting had been closed by some one  
else. There was less religious interest than any year that I was  
in Amherst.  
 
" I suppose Senior year is always the most agreeable of the  
College course. It was so with me on account of the studies  
pursued, but especially on account of the peculiar way in which  
our class was cemented together by the revival of religion which  
we then enjoyed. At the very beginning of the year, there was  
deep general interest in the class especially in the class prayer-  
meetings. Christians who had been in doubt and darkness,  
saw light and peace again. I know that I was myself deeply  
impressed with the feeling that I had been thoughtless in re-  
gard to the great realities of life, and I resolved to give more  
time to general religious reading as well as devotion. The Col-  
lege-Fast clay was one of the solemn days of my life. It was a  
day of bitter temptation and struggle. My soul seemed beset by  
the Evil One himself especially in the morning prayer-meeting.  
The afternoon was a time of spiritual joy and triumph in Christ,  
when the Holy Spirit seemed to have driven away every thought  
of evil and I could hardly restrain my feelings of love and wor-  
ship. It was one of those bright, warm winter days which tell  
of coming spring, and everything seemed in perfect unison with  
my feelings. Dr. Stearns' sermon that day on ' Whither I go  
ye can not come,' seemed the best I ever heard, and wakened  
in my heart a love for him which I still feel. Mr, Graves  
preached in the evening, and we had fully attended entry prayer-  
meetings in the afternoon.  
 
"It was the commencement of a wonderful work of God.  
 
verted men in our class seemed much less approachable and  
much less interested than two years before.  
 
"You 1 came into our Saturday evening class prayer-meeting  
March 3, arid spoke to us, and I think, every one there felt that  
the Holy Spirit was present and working in our hearts. Only  
two or three unconverted men were present, but one of them  
rose and asked our prayers.  
 
" It was that afternoon that you came into my room and talked  
with me an hour in reference to my classmate F. He had been  
a rival in influence both in the class and in the Literary Society. 2  
I disliked him and knew that he disliked me ; but it was not un-  
til you told me of his sad state of mind and asked me to pray  
for him, that I became conscious, on my knees, that I not only  
disliked him but cherished unchristian feelings towards him. I  
know that I repented bitterly of my sin that day, and prayed for  
him in all sincerity. I believe all our class were praying for him.  
I shall never forget the hour when I heard that he had become  
a Christian, and went to his room to see him. It is not a thing  
it was F's conversion three or four days later which sent a thrill  
through the College and broke up the band of men who had  
united to resist the revival.  
 
" C. [another classmate] who had had such a sad experience  
Sophomore year, was roused again to reconsider his position, and  
for a time was in the deepest distress I have ever witnessed, 'be-  
cause he could not feel enough to become a Christian.' He went  
to you again for direction, and finally felt himself to be a new  
man in Christ.  
 
" We had some noon class meetings which will never be for-  
gotten by those who attended them, where we wept and prayed  
together until it seemed we were bound together by such cords  
of love and sympathy as unite saints and angels in heaven. This  
may seem a strong expression. It was exactly what we felt, and  
 
1 The letter is addressed to the writer of this History.  
 
2 They were members of opposing fraternities, one in a Secret, the other in the  
Anti- Secret Society.  
 
no one who has not been in a College revival, can realize the  
truth of it. There can be nothing like it out of College. The  
genuineness of this feeling was manifest when we came to the  
usually exciting class elections. Our meeting was free from any  
exhibition of selfishness or party feeling.  
 
" Our class day, if described, would only be the story of all  
class days to you, but for us there is but one such day. Ours  
lasted from eight o'clock one day until half-past six the next day.  
It commenced with a social prayer-meeting, and closed at morning  
prayers when we all came into the Chapel, and the President  
gave us his blessing. We were in such thorough good humor  
that I find no trace in my journal of any grumbling about the  
appointments for Commencement, which came out that morning.  
 
" When we entered College, out of sixty-three in our class  
only twenty-two were Christians. When we graduated, out of  
fifty-four, forty-eight were professors of religion. In all there  
were twenty-four conversions in our class during our College  
course. For those who graduated without hope in Christ, we  
with only a few omissions, as an illustration of the progress and  
the results of a revival in College as seen in a single class, espe-  
cially a Senior class. We must now go back for some explana-  
tions and additions. Several of the best scholars and leading  
men in the Senior class, at this time, as our readers will have  
seen already, were not only without hope in Christ, but opposed  
to evangelical and personal religion. This fact, together with  
the generally low state of Christian feeling and action in Col-  
lege, pressed as a heavy burden on the hearts of the Faculty  
from the beginning of the winter term, and there was many a  
tender and touching scene at their meetings for business and  
for prayer, before the annual College Fast. As the term ad-  
vanced, this interest and solicitude deepened into intense anx-  
iety, leading to much prayer and effort in which the Faculty en-  
joyed in increasing measure the sympathy and co-operation of  
 
manifest that the adversary was rallying his forces in opposition,  
and that some of the most talented, scholarly and influential  
young men, led by some of the foremost men of the Senior class,  
were banded together to resist all good spiritual influences. Fore-  
most among them all in the view of all College and by his own  
confession, was the Senior of whom so much is said in the forego-  
ing communication. Of course, all the Christians in College could  
not but be praying for him. At the same time, all wise and suit-  
able means were used to bring him to better counsels and under  
better influences. Christian students who enjoyed his friendship  
and confidence, were faithful in the use of arguments and en-  
treaties. I had repeated interviews with him, and followed up  
personal conversation with written appeals. Never have I seen  
such bitterness of feeling coupled with such acknowledged and  
utter wretchedness. He cursed the day of his birth, and was  
almost ready to curse his best friends, the name, sacred in the  
history of missions, which he bore, the parents that gave him  
birth, and the God who made him for a life of sin and misery.  
Like Saul of Tarsus, he breathed out threatenings, slaughter  
and death against the church. But like Saul of Tarsus, it was at  
length said of him, " Behold, he prayeth." Brought in by the  
hand of personal friendship and affection, to a religious meeting,  
near the close of the meeting he rose with difficult}^ and with  
faltering tongue asked the prayers of those very Christians whom  
he had hated and would have been ready to persecute. Led by  
another Christian friend he came to my study, and we fell on our  
knees together, and together praised the God and Savior of whom  
he had thought and felt, and even spoken, such bitter things.  
The next morning his whole appearance as well as character and  
spirit was changed. His face shone like that of Moses when he  
came down from the Mount where he had been with God. The  
change was visible to all, even to members of other classes and  
the most casual observers. " I saw him," says a letter written by  
one who was then a member of College, " the next morning after  
his conversion. Not a trace remained of his former haughty and  
sarcastic look. Meekness and peace were written on his features."  
From that time he labored to build up what before he sought to  
destroy. Three years later, this Saul of Tarsus was with us an  
 
officer of College, a co-laborer in the revival of 1858, a very  
Paul the Apostle in the boldness, force of reasoning and fervor  
of eloquence with which he prayed men to be reconciled to God.  
And now he is one of the most able, earnest and useful among  
the pastors of Congregational churches in Connecticut.  
 
The other classmate of whose conversion Prof. Washburn  
writes, was scarcely less prominent as a scholar and a man of  
influence, scarcely less hostile to evangelical and spiritual re-  
ligion though less declared and outspoken in his opposition, and  
the change in his spirit and attitude towards religion was scarcely  
less remarkable. 1 Other strong men in the same class also bowed  
to the easy yoke of the meek and lowly Jesus. At the Sacra-  
ment of the Lord's Supper in June, eight Seniors, including the  
two of whom we have spoken so particularly, publicly professed  
their faith in Christ before their fellow-students and the world  
by joining the College church. There were nineteen additions  
by profession to the College church in 1855, chiefly as the fruit  
of this revival, others joined the churches at home. The num-  
ber of converts was not as great as in some of our revivals. But  
the effects of it were most happy, especially in transforming the  
character and changing the influence of the Senior class. In  
his Annual Report to the Trustees, 2 President Stearns says:  
titute of religion but now seem well established in the faith,  
will bless God forever that they were connected with Amherst  
College in 1855."  
 
The truth of history and justice to individuals require us to  
add, that in the labors of this revival the Faculty received valu-  
able assistance from Rev. Frederic W. Graves, a son of Col.  
Graves, and a graduate of the College in the Class of '25. A  
man of prayer and fervid piety like his father, and a clear, strong,  
close and pungent preacher, of the type sometimes called revival  
 
1 This young man was made a Brigadier-General and Brevet Major-General in the  
late war.  
 
2 Though unpublished, the President has kindly placed his Annual Reports in my  
 
preachers, he came to visit his Alma Mater and the place of his  
former residence in the winter term of 1855, lodged for some six  
weeks in the family of one of the Professors, and preached some-  
times on the Sabbath, but more on Sunday, Tuesday and Thurs-  
day evenings, aided the pastor in Inquiry Meetings, and his la-  
bors, while they were acceptable and edifying to the officers,  
were blessed to the quickening of the Christian students and  
the conversion of those who were out of Christ. " The stu-  
dents relished his directness and fervor," writes one who was  
then a student, 1 " as they always loved to see the exhibition of  
these qualities in their teachers. At first they made some sport  
of his awkwardness, and thought, if the Faculty wanted to in-  
terest them in religion, they should have brought in some noted  
preacher instead of him. But no sooner did they find out that  
the man took an affectionate interest in their spiritual welfare,  
than there was a complete revolution in their feelings. After  
that they hung upon his lips."  
 
With this exception, (and this is hardly an exception, for this  
came uninvited and hardly answers to that description) with  
this exception, the Faculty have never invited or employed the  
assistance of evangelists, revival preachers, or to any considerable  
extent preachers from abroad in revivals of religion. Whatever  
may be said of the wisdom of employing such men and measures  
elsewhere, they are not adapted to a community so critical and  
fastidious as College students who, certainly in Amherst, usually  
prefer their own preachers to those from without, and whose at-  
tention, if they liked the foreign preacher, would almost inevi-  
tably be diverted from the truth to the man and his manner of  
preaching.  
 
Of the revival in 1857, President Stearns gave the following  
for and promoted by the Head of the Church. Early in the year  
an increased seriousness was apparent among the students which  
deepened during the second term into a gentle revival of re-  
ligion. No extraordinary measures or additional meetings were  
 
1 Kev. John Whitehill.  
 
resorted to, but by private conversation and preaching adapted  
to the religiously impressible state of the College, thoughtfulness  
was cherished and inquiring minds were directed. We have  
never exactly ' numbered the people,' but thirteen students  
were received to the church, by profession, at our July com-  
munion. Other have joined churches in which their friends  
at home are members. While this revival was rich in souls re-  
newed, the happiest results were experienced from its influence  
on professors many who had become indifferent, and some  
quite irregular, were brought to repentance, and Christian stu-  
dents generally were quickened, and put upon a course of re-  
vived watchfulness, spirituality and zeal. Good order has pre-  
vailed during the last two terms to a pleasing extent, and we  
can not but hope that much has been gained towards having a  
other during the period now under review, if not any other in the  
whole history of the College, and that in 1857 was a delightful  
prelude and preparation for it. 1 The following account of the  
former, with an occasional reference to the latter, was given to  
the public by the pastor, President Stearns, not long after the  
event and is justified in all its essential features by the perma-  
nent fruits as they have been seen in subsequent years.  
 
" The religious community will be interested to know that in  
the 'Great Awakening' of the times, Amherst College has not  
been passed by unblessed. A wonderful revival has just been  
experienced here. It commenced with the term which has  
recently closed. From small beginnings it made gradual prog-  
ress, till our entire collegiate community was brought under  
its influence. Week after week * the little cloud ' might be seen  
rising, spreading, thickening, with here and there a few drops,  
and many intervening alternations of hope and fear on the part  
of observers, till, toward the end of the term, the shower began  
to fall, and for the last ten days ' the great rain was not stayed.'  
 
" Nearly three-quarters of our number were previously profess-  
 
1 This part of the History is copied mainly from the Enlarged Edition of the  
author's Premium Essay on Prayer for Colleges as issued in 1860.  
 
ors of religion, about twenty of them having taken their stand  
publicly on the side of Christ some months before. Of the re-  
mainder, between forty and fifty have been hopefully converted  
during the term, leaving less than twenty in the whole College  
undecided. Besides these, ten or twelve who had once been  
professors, some of them giving little or no evidence of piety,  
were awakened and converted anew, while nearly the whole  
body of Christian students seemed to receive a fresh baptism of  
the Spirit.  
 
" Of the Senior class, but three or four remain who have not  
commenced the Christian life ; of the Junior class, but one and  
he an inquirer, if not a Christian ; of the Sophomore class, four  
or five ; of the Freshmen, nine or ten. While there was no ap-  
pearance of extravagance, irregular zeal or enthusiasm, there  
was manifested a deep sense of sin, an entire giving up of all  
hopes of self-salvation, unconditional submission to a Sovereign  
God, and the affectionate and often joyful confidence of faith  
in Christ. The reformation of character and manners was no  
less remarkable than the renewal of hearts. College discipline,  
in the way of restraint and censure, seemed to lose its oifice ;  
order prevailed, study was attended to as a religious duty ;  
sacred psalms took the place of questionable songs, and social  
revelries gave way to heavenly friendships many young men  
have been hopefully snatched from ruin, and inspired with new  
feelings of self-respect and new and noble determinations for the  
future. How they will hold out, time must show. Generally in  
such cases, some fall back. But many circumstances inspire us  
with unusual confidence that this unhappy number will be small.  
 
The changes seem to us like those radical and permanent ones,  
of which, under the power of religion, we have seen so many."  
 
To this statement by the pastor, Dr. Hitchcock added the  
following testimony as the result of his own long observation  
and experience : " I have been witness to all the revivals here  
since the College was established, except the first during Dr.  
Moore's presidency ; and I must say, that I do not remember in  
any of them such an almost universal and thoroughly subduing  
power manifested as during the last two weeks of the term just  
closed. One or two facts will show this to those who are un-  
 
acquainted with College life. All such know the intense and  
almost irresistible desire of students to start for home at the  
earliest possible moment of release at the end of a term. But  
this year nearly all remained over night, at the invitation of the  
President, that they might attend a parting religious meeting,  
which proved one of intense interest. Another fact is new in  
the religious history of the College. Those students who re-  
main in town during vacation, with the officers and their families,  
meet twice a week for prayer ; and there is no abatement of re-  
ligious interest. The small number of those left unconverted,  
much less than in any former revival, also shows the thorough-  
ness of the work."  
 
We have already spoken of the happy influence of the gener-  
al prayer-meeting, which orignated in this revival and continues  
to this day, in breaking down the separating wall between the  
Faculty and the students, as well as the distinctions between the  
upper and lower classes, and merging them all in the one rela-  
tion of Christian brethren. At the same time it exerted a power-  
ful influence to prevent backsliding to such an extent as too  
often follows periods of revival. It thus contributed indirectly,  
with other and more direct efforts, to check those " sins, du-  
plicity and direct falsehood being the worst, which spring from  
a fancied diversity of interest between the pupil and his instruct-  
or, which, it is to be hoped, the good sense of young men will  
before long banish from our American colleges." l  
 
In his Address at the Dedication of Williston Hall and East  
College which took place soon after the commencement of the  
summer term, (April 19, 1858,) President Stearns was able to  
say : " It is a source of high gratification that the entire class  
which as Seniors 2 have just taken possession of the building  
(East College), have all enrolled their names as the followers  
of that blessed One, to whom the College was originally dedi-  
cated. For one year at least, arid the first year of its occupancy,  
Church in Yale College," as quoted in the Essay on Prayer for Colleges.  
 
2 Juniors at the time of the revival and also of the Address.  
 
of praise. Of more than two hundred young men connected  
with us, nearly all have enrolled their names for a life-long dis-  
cipleship in the school of Christ.  
 
"The College has enjoyed three special revivals of religion  
since my connection with it. The first in the winter of 1854-5,  
in consequence of which not far from five and twenty gave in  
their names as disciples of Christ. The second in the winter of  
'56 and '57 in connection with which about twenty, mostly Soph-  
omores, made profession of their faith. The third commenced  
soon after the beginning of the last term, and became very re-  
markable towards its close. As some account of it has recently  
been given to the public, I will only add that this renewal of  
what seems like the primitive times of the church, appears to  
have suffered no abatement in consequence of vacation, and the  
heaventy influence which pervaded the College near the close  
of the last term, though not manifest as then in numerous con-  
which now exists between the Faculty and the students of the  
College, seems to us of a peculiarly desirable and agreeable char-  
acter. So far as discipline is concerned, we are a fellowship  
fections to be corrected, and improvements to be introduced and  
consummated. We can not but feel, however, that through the  
labors of our predecessors, the generosity of our patrons, together  
with our own humble efforts, but still more through the multi-  
tude of prayers which are going up to heaven in an all-surround-  
ing intercession for us, and which, through the Great Intercessor,  
have become signally prevalent, evoking remarkable manifesta-  
tions of divinely gracious power upon us, foundations have been  
laid for an object which the teachers and friends of the College  
are so earnestly laboring to accomplish, viz., the upbuilding of  
a high and healthful scholarship, and the development of a sym-  
metrical, powerful, wise and inviting Christian manhood in all  
 
The happy effects of this revival were manifest long after its  
close. At the end of the next collegiate year (1858-9) almost a  
year and a half after the occurrence of the revival, the Presi-  
dent said in his Report to the Trustees : " The year past has  
been characterized, on the part of the students, by general good  
order, industry, docility and a manifest disposition to do well.  
Though it may have been a time of gradual declension rather  
than of revival, and there have been instances of Christian in-  
consistency and backsliding, I am not aware that there has been  
a single case of apostasy. The religious life of the College seems  
to me to have been, and still to be, of a much higher character  
since the winter of 1858, than it was at any time before since  
my first acquaintance with it. The students appear not only  
more attentive to religious meetings, and more generally correct  
in Christian deportment, but to have much more confidence in  
the Faculty and a greater desire to conform cheerfully to their  
requirements. The disposition to mischief has been meliorated,  
and for a year and a half past the public damages have been so  
small that no extra charge has been made in the regular College  
bills.  
 
" Exceptions to the general good conduct of the year so far as  
they exist, are nearly all connected with the use of intoxicating  
liquors. It became evident to the Faculty that alcoholic stimu-  
lants were sold freely, though clandestinely, in the village and  
that quite a number of students, overcome by temptation, were  
in danger of being ruined by them. When all other methods  
of correcting this evil had failed, by some means, no one pretends  
to know how, 1 the names of six students who were known to  
have yielded more or less to the alcoholic temptation and to have  
procured liquor in the place, were given to the grand jury sit-  
ting in Northampton ; and those students were constrained to  
testify under oath against the seller, and his establishment was  
thus broken up. This movement made a considerable stir at the  
time, but the result has been most happy upon the records of  
 
as witnesses, and 2, that if summoned and put under oath, they  
will testify, and rather than perjure themselves, testify truly.  
among our young men in their intercourse with the Faculty. In  
the earlier years of my connection with the College, students  
who had done wrong so as to expose themselves to censure,  
would almost uniformly, when questioned, deny it. I am sorry  
that professors of religion were not always, nor even generally,  
exceptions to this rule. Now it is a very rare thing for a stu-  
dent to tell me a downright falsehood. In addition to what has  
already been said of the consequences of our revival, I attribute  
this improvement also to the efforts which have been made to  
control by moral influences, instead of penalty, whenever the  
good of the College would allow of the milder discipline, and  
to the working of a principle introduced two or three years ago  
Early in the year there was an outbreak between the Sophomore  
and Junior classes which had proceeded to a riot and seriously  
imperiled life. The newspapers circulated the fact, but the news-  
papers did not know that blamable as the commotion was, it  
originated in praiseworthy intentions and in a position taken by  
the Sophomores that the old practice of insulting and abusing  
Freshmen should with their class be totally discontinued. In  
carrying out this determination some reflections were thrown  
upon the Juniors (the Sophomores of the preceding year) which,  
in the impulsive heat of the moment, they (the Juniors) thought  
themselves justified in resenting. To the praise of both classes,  
however, after the President appeared on the ground, the bear-  
year 1859-60, is thus described by the President in his Annual  
Report : " The question has been more frequently discussed in  
the Faculty the past year than ever before, how the largest,  
 
truest Christian manhood can be best developed in all the young  
men connected with the College. Though we have not always  
succeeded according to our desires, and individuals have disap-  
pointed our hopes in regard to them, yet, on the whole, I must  
think, that considerable progress has been made towards realiz-  
ing the true ends of education. The College has been for the  
most part orderly during the year, and we all think that a real  
improvement is manifest in the behavior and moral tone of the  
students as well as in their scholarship.  
 
" During the winter term, there were some interesting religions  
indications. Solemnity; and thoughtfulness pervaded the Col-  
lege ; prayer- meetings were thronged, professors of religion were  
quickened, and cases of anxious inquiry appeared. For a week  
or ten days it almost seemed as if the Pentecostal scenes of  
1858 were about to be renewed. In this expectation we were  
partially disappointed. The result, however, was not exactly  
clouds without rain. There were a few hopeful conversions,  
and among them two or three of the most prominent men in  
the Senior class, attended with a general lifting up of the re-  
nothing particularly noteworthy in the religious history of the  
College, we find the following in the President's Report to the  
Trustees at their Annual Meeting in 1862 : " Religious meetings  
have been well attended during the year, and the part which the  
students have taken in them, indicates growth in grace. The  
winter and spring were characterized by one of those seasons of  
special religious interest which have not been uncommon in the  
College. There were not only quite a number of hopeful con-  
versions, but the religious life of the College, especially in the  
Junior class, has been greatly quickened and set forward. Many  
of the prayers of the students in our prayer-meetings have been,  
and are still from week to week, distinguished by a measure of  
solemnity, richness and unction, not surpassed, if equaled, in the  
great revival of 1858. The influence of meetings in which stu-  
dents take part with the Faculty, like the younger and older  
 
the College during that remarkable year, has been good and only  
good, and that continually."  
 
In 1863, the President thus reports : " There has been no  
such special attention to religion as is usually understood by the  
term revival, though there have been some hopeful conversions  
and a marked improvement in the religious character of many,  
while it must be confessed that a sort of religious apathy too  
generally prevails. Nothing is more needed in College than  
such a general awakening and renovation of character as was  
enjoyed by it in 1858. That was a period of reformation as well  
as revival, the good effects of which have not yet wholly disap-  
peared, though the Class of '62 was the last which had personal  
experience of it."  
 
The President's Report at the Annual Meeting of the Corpo-  
ration in July, 1864, so far as it relates to the religious condition  
of the College was as follows : " There was during the winter  
term some special attention to religion in all the classes. Many  
professors of religion were greatly quickened in their Christian  
life, and carried through new and valuable experiences, while  
some twenty or more publicly confessed Christ for the first time.  
A special religious interest and a considerable number of conver-  
sions has characterized many of our winter terms. The unbe-  
lieving might naturally subject this peculiarity to criticism on  
the ground of periodical religion. We can only answer that the  
college mind, for some reason, is more impressible during that  
season of the year than it is ordinarily in the other terms. I think  
it is likely that the Concert of Prayer for Colleges has something  
to do instrumentally, as well as efficiently, in producing this re-  
sult. But if Christians can be spiritually elevated and impeni-  
tent hearts softened and renewed at one season of the year more  
easily than at other times, why should we quarrel with the Prov-  
idence or the Spirit of God? When the fields are white for  
the harvest, that is the time to reap. A state of reaction is apt  
to follow in the summer term. This year the reaction, for -a  
time, was more marked than usual, though I can not but think  
that every revival, on the whole, elevates the religious character  
of the College."  
 
As the College Chapel was undergoing repairs, the Sabbath  
 
worship as well as morning and evening prayers were held in  
Alumni Hall during the summer and autumn of 1864, and at  
each of the three communions in May, July and November,  
there were considerable additions by profession to the College  
Church, thus hallowing that Hall in the memory of not a few  
who have since exerted a positive Christian influence in all the  
varied walks of public and private life, as the place where they  
consecrated themselves to the service of the Master.  
 
The year 1866 was a memorable year in the religious history  
of the College, exceeding even 1858 in the number of those who  
began a new Christian life, and not surpassed by it in the deep  
interest of the scenes and events of the revival, though differing  
much from that season in the beginning and progress of the  
work. Its peculiar characteristics as well as its happy results  
are sufficiently noted in the President's Annual Report : " A few  
weeks after my return (from Europe) there sprang up among  
us a remarkable interest in personal religion which finally per-  
vaded all classes, and nearly all hearts, resulting in deepening  
and setting forward the entire religious life of the College, pro-  
ducing some wonderful changes of character and introducing  
some forty students to the first beginning of Christian experi-  
ence. Revivals of religion are not uncommon in Amherst Col-  
lege, and there are many men brought under their influence  
while under-graduates, now scattered abroad in the world, who  
constantly thank God for their participation in them. But I  
have characterized this religious interest as remarkable. It was  
remarkable in its rise, coming without much previous expecta-  
tion of it, or much use of means to promote it. A year ago last  
winter there was a deep feeling among many of the Faculty and  
many of the students that a religious awakening was greatly  
needed, and much effort was put forth to secure it. But the  
results were small and unsatisfactory. Very different was the  
revival just experienced. It sprang up, to human appearance,  
quite suddenly, and almost spontaneously. It was marked by a  
deep and calm thoughtfulness in those who came specially under  
its influence. When decisions were reached, they were freely  
and modestly expressed. The young men came out one after  
 
feel that my sins are forgiven. I know my own weakness, but  
I believe that the Spirit of God will assist me, and I shall per-  
severe." The change in some students whose habits had not  
been good was surprising. It was apparent in orderly behavior,  
a more gentlemanly bearing, in industry taking the place of idle-  
ness, and rapidly rising scholarship instead of a neglect of stud-  
ies, in their countenances, and day after day until this time the  
change has attracted observation. Where sourness and discon-  
tent used to be expressed, there is now sunshine and joy. Nor  
has there been any unpleasant reaction. Many have united with  
the church, here or elsewhere, and I can not say, that any have  
gone back to the old condition of carelessness or wrong doing."  
 
The following brief memoranda kept at the time by Prof.  
Seelye will give the reader a more definite conception of the  
progress of this awakening from day to day and week to week  
through the term. It illustrates one characteristic of revivals  
in College to which we have often had occasion to allude, viz.,  
their rapidity and the comparatively brief period within which  
the greater part of the harvest is usually reaped.  
 
" January. The beginning of the term not marked by any-  
thing special. Attendance upon the evening meetings thin.  
 
"February. Increasing attendance upon the evening meet-  
ings. B of the Senior class indulges a hope.  
 
''March 1. Day of prayer for Colleges. 1 Meeting in the  
morning impressive, but not unusually so. Afternoon very  
solemn. Evening with unusual evidence of God's presence.  
 
"March 2 and 3. Increasing interest.  
 
" 4. Sunday. In the evening meeting Junior W an-  
nounced his new hope.  
 
" 6. Tuesday evening. Special meeting of prayer. Small  
chapel full. Great solemnity. Three Seniors, two Juniors, eight  
Sophomores, and three Freshmen announced their hope in Christ.  
 
" 8. Thursday evening. The President lectured to a full house.  
 
" 9. Inquiry meeting in the Senior recitation room. Thirty  
present.  
 
scene as the chapel presented this afternoon. Every student at-  
tentive. Some weeping. All apparently solemn. Evening meet-  
ing.  
 
"15. Thursday evening lecture. Large attendance, though  
not so many as on Tuesday evening.  
 
" 16. Friday evening. Inquiry meeting in Senior recitation  
room. Not so full as before.  
 
" 18. Sunday. A good day. Evening meeting solemn. No  
new cases of conversion.  
 
" 20. Tuesday evening. A full meeting. One new case of in-  
terest. Junior W reported. He himself confined to his room.  
 
" 22. Thursday evening lecture. Good attendance.  
 
" 25. Much interest in the services of the day. Evening meet-  
ing peculiarly solemn. Closed with a prayer of reconsecration.  
 
" 27. Tuesday evening. Not so many present, though a large  
meeting. Much interest in the prayers of the young converts.  
decorum. Two conversions noted." The same marked propri-  
ety of deportment continued through the entire following year  
(1867) insomuch that in his Annual Report for that year the Pres-  
ident spoke of it as " unprecedented during his connection with  
the College and probably during its entire history that there has  
been no instance of such aggravated wrong conduct as to re-  
quire removal from College or severe censure."  
 
We have had no great revival since 1866. But the years  
which have succeeded that great spiritual ingathering, have by  
no means been years of barrenness. Every year there has been  
more or less of quickening among Christians and of awakening  
 
among others every year there have been some conversions in  
almost every class. And every year, with rare exceptions, we hear  
that some who seemed very near the kingdom of heaven but did  
not enter, soon after they left ws, consecrated themselves publicly  
to Christ and his church. Some also who left us still declared  
unbelievers in Christianity, though doubtless not a little shaken  
in their unbelief, have ere long openly professed their faith in  
evangelical religion.  
 
The following religious statistics of the Class of '69 illustrate  
some of these statements and shed light on the religious condi-  
tion of the College during these latter years. They lie before me  
in the handwriting of the lamented Kittredge of that class, who  
read them to those present at the last Sunday evening meeting  
before Senior vacation, and at my request left a copy in my  
hands foT preservation. They are almost hallowed by his death  
little more than a year later, stricken down in the midst of his  
 
The increase of Christian character and influence during the  
course indicated by these statistics can not but strike the obser-  
vation of our readers. Were we at liberty to narrate the per-  
sonal history of members of the class during their connection  
with the College, and for a short period after their graduation,  
was, however, like 1860, one of those years, in which the awak-  
ening was less general, and the conversions fewer than in most  
of our revivals, so as to leave it a doubtful question whether or  
not it should be reckoned among them. There was much prayer  
and effort for a revival, particularly in the Senior class, and  
the more because four years had now elapsed since the great in-  
gathering in 1866, and the Christians in that class felt a strong  
desire, for their own sake as well as for the sake of the College,  
not to graduate without witnessing a similar season. Nor were  
these prayers and efforts unavailing. They were much refreshed  
and strengthened, other Christians were more or less quickened,  
and several, particularly of the Senior class, began a new life in  
which they have persevered and exerted a strong Christian in-  
fluence. Truth and justice, perhaps, require the historian to  
add, that there was, connected with this awakening and result-  
ing in part from the imperfect success of efforts to promote it, a  
spirit of dissatisfaction, not to say disaffection, towards the pas-  
tor, not uncommon under like circumstances in other churches  
and not unknown in the previous history of our College Church,  
yet never before existing to such an extent, which marred the  
fruits of |he revival, the happiness of the pastor, the peace of  
the church, and the harmony of the College, and which none  
will regret in future years so much as they who were the most  
influenced by it.  
 
In his report at the Commencement in 1871, the President  
says : " The Senior class will graduate with a larger number  
of students uncommitted to the Christian side than has been  
found in any Senior class for more than a decade of years. They  
are however able men and true. Some of them are said to be  
 
their way to right, perhaps, through a process of doubting and  
searching. I have great faith that most of them will become in  
time devoted to Christ and strong in his service."  
 
This strong persuasion of the President which the Professors  
generally shared with him, has now (a few months after their  
graduation) already been fulfilled in the radical change of one  
of the strongest men of this class who, up to the time of his  
graduation had persisted in his skepticism ; and they are thus  
confirmed in the confident expectation that the others will yet  
be found sitting at the feet of Jesus.  
 
As I write these pages (February, 1872), the College is re-  
joicing in the manifest special presence of the Spirit of God.  
Religious meetings are full and interesting. Christians are en-  
joying delightful communion with each other arid with their  
Lord. A few feel that they have begun a new life in Christ,  
and many are inquiring the way of salvation. Our hope is that  
the second half-century is thus opening with a year rich in spir-  
itual blessings, and auspicious of a religious prosperity in coming  
years exceeding that which it has been our privilege to record in  
the past history of the College. May He to whom the Institu-  
tion is consecrated, prosper the omen and do for us far beyond  
our fondest hopes.  
 
Two or three changes in the religious usages of the College have  
taken place during the period now under review which require  
statement and explanation, and that the more because they are  
liable to be misunderstood, and have perhaps been regarded as  
a lowering of the religious standard. One of these is the giv-  
ing up of evening prayers. These were dispensed with first, on  
Wednesday and Saturday evenings, in order to give the students  
scope for longer walks and freer exercise and recreation on those  
two afternoons. Sunday evening prayers were then given up to  
avoid too many required religious exercises on the Sabbath, and  
to encourage and facilitate a voluntary attendance at the even-  
ing meeting. Meanwhile evening prayers had been abolished  
in some of the older Colleges. They were suspended here for  
two successive years during the winter term, partly by reason  
of the greater discomfort and inconvenience of attending them  
in the cold weather and the short days crowded with other ex-  
 
ercises, and partly by way of experiment. At length in 1869,  
they were given up entirely, and more time was given to morn-  
ing prayers, and special pains were taken to make them more  
truly devotional services. The order of service is now fourfold.  
1, Invocation, 2, Reading of the Scriptures, 3, Singing, 4, Prayer.  
The President, when at home, conducts all the services. Not  
unfrequently he accompanies the reading of the Scriptures with  
brief expositions. He has thus read in course and expounded  
all the more difficult books both of the Old and New Testa-  
ment, preparing himself for it as carefully as he would for a  
recitation and thus making luminous many portions of the Holy  
Writ which young men, and older men too, usually read in our  
common version without any conception of their meaning. Min-  
isters and other strangers who attend our morning devotions,  
have been struck with the felicity of these expositions and the  
prayers that follow and enforce them. They often remark also  
the order and decorum, rare in any worshiping assembly, with  
which the students rise and take part in the singing, listen to  
the reading and exposition of the Scriptures, and then all bow  
their heads during the prayer. We would not be understood to  
say, that there are no irregularities or improprieties of conduct.  
But there are less than there are in most miscellaneous congre-  
gations of men, women and children far less than there used  
to be here, especially at evening prayers when the students  
would come in, many of them from their sports, full of hilarity  
and excitement, sometimes almost incapable of restraining the  
manifestation of their feelings, still more unable to command  
their thoughts into a frame for devotion. And though I was  
not, at the time, in favor of the change, it has worked so well  
that I am quite reconciled to the present arrangement.  
 
Another change is that in regard to biblical instruction. It  
will be remembered that a weekly Bible exercise on Thursday  
afternoon was early introduced. During the greater part of Dr.  
Humphrey's presidency, the historical parts of the Bible were  
studied by the Freshmen, the prophetical parts by the Sopho-  
mores, and the doctrinal parts by the Juniors, while the Presi-  
dent instructed the Seniors in the Catechism. Under the presi-  
 
Professor should take part in the biblical instruction by teaching  
something in or about the Bible kindred to his own department.  
But both these plans were subject to a twofold difficulty that  
of finding Professors able and willing to teach the Bible wisely  
and successfully, and that of interesting the students in any  
study, especially any unsecular study, in which there was only  
one lesson a week ; any such exercise, no matter what it may be,  
fails to command interest and exertion, and proves sooner or  
later to be a weakly exercise. Under the influence of such con-  
siderations, the Bible exercise has gradually changed and fallen  
off, till now for some years the only proper Bible lessons in the  
College have been those of the Greek Professor in the Greek  
Testament in which he teaches the Sophomore class one of the  
Gospels or the Acts, and the Junior class one of the Epistles  
in consecutive lessons for a few weeks each year, going over  
a part of a chapter analytically and exegetically one day, and  
the next day requiring the student in review to repeat in sub-  
stance the exposition given in advance the previous day. The  
interest which has sometimes been excited in these lessons may  
be inferred from the fact that these are the only recitations in  
which the Professor has ever been requested by his class to ex-  
tend the exercise beyond the usual length and make them an  
hour and a half instead of hour recitations. ' Whether this is all  
the direct instruction in the Bible that ought to be given during  
a four years' course in a Christian College, our readers will judge  
for themselves. It is doubtless more than is given in most of  
our Colleges, much more certainly than is given in some of them.  
It should not be understood, however, that no other religious  
instruction is now given in the College or in the class-room.  
At the request of the Senior class, the Professor of Philosophy  
gives them a lesson, partly a recitation and partly a lecture or  
conversation, every Saturday morning in the Catechism. The  
instructions of the President are all religious, pertaining to  
Biblical History and Interpretation and the Evidences of Chris-  
tianity. His Bible readings and expositions at morning prayers  
have been equivalent some years to a full hour's lesson once a  
week to each class. Then there are Dr. Burr's lectures to the  
Senior class on the Scientific Evidences of Religion. Moreover  
 
the Professors and Instructors, being all Christian men, and  
many of them Christian ministers, still continue, most of them  
at least, to teach all the branches of literature and science as  
the earliest Professors and Tutors did, in their indissoluble rela-  
tions to the great central truths of natural and revealed relig-  
ion. So that whatever may have been the impressions or ap-  
prehensions of any of the friends of the College, the last com-  
plaint that any student would make in regard to the present  
regime, would be that Christianity is superseded, overlooked or  
undervalued in the teaching or the personal influence of the  
President and Professors. Long may it be before that shall be  
with the fact that they record five ordinations in the College  
Chapel by Councils convened by the College Church during this  
period. Four of the persons ordained were graduates of the  
College, and they were ordained, three of them, to the work of  
foreign missions, and the fourth to a chaplaincy in the army.  
The fifth ordination was that of Prof. James G. Vose to the  
work of the ministry.  
 
Mr. Daniel Bliss, of the Class of '52, having been accepted  
by the American Board of Foreign Missions, as a missionary to  
Syria, was ordained Thursday, October 18, 1855. Rev. Presi-  
dent Stearns preached the sermon; Rev. Mr. Stone of East-  
invited were those in Andover Theological Seminary ; Yale Col-  
lege; North Brookfield; Fall River; Derby, Conn.; Granby;  
South Danvers ; Old South, Boston ; Edwards Church, North-  
 
ordaining prayer 1 by Rev. Dr. Kirk of Boston ; right hand of  
fellowship by Rev. Dr. Van Lennep of the Turkish Mission ;  
charge by Rev. Prof. Tyler.  
 
Mr. Joseph A. Leach, of the Class of '61, was ordained Feb-  
ruary 23, 1864, as Chaplain of the 19th regiment of colored  
troops. Sermon by Prof. Tyler ; ordaining prayer by President  
Stearns; charge by Rev. Mr. Greene of Hatfield; right hand  
of fellowship by Rev. Mr. Lane of Whately.  
 
Mr. Charles A. Park, of the Class of '67, was ordained June  
15, 1870. Sermon by Rev. Prof. C. E. Smyth of Andover The-  
ological Seminary ; ordaining prayer by President Stearns ; charge  
by Rev. C. E. Park of Boxford, (father of the candidate) ; right  
hand of fellowship by Rev. W. E. Park of Lawrence, (cousin  
of the candidate) ; Rev. Gordon Hall of Northampton, was mod-  
erator, and Rev. J. L. Jenkins of Amherst, scribe of the coun-  
cil.  
 
The following record will call up sacred associations in the  
memory of some of our readers :  
 
" June 15, 1856, Sabbath evening, the pastor called a meet-  
ing of the church in the room No. 6, of the chapel building,  
recently fitted up as the President's lecture room. As the room  
is designed, not only for the President's literary exercises, but  
tion Room, on the first floor in the north-east corner of the  
chapel building, was, for several years, the place for holding in-  
quiry meetings, as well as church meetings and the daily prayer-  
meetings ; and we doubt not, many souls have been " born  
there," and many more have there been quickened and strength-  
ened in their spiritual life. More recently, the Society of In-  
quiry Room has succeeded it as the place of the daily prayer-  
meetings of the students. The old " Rhetorical Room," which  
was "the place where prayer was wont to be made," from the  
 
the addition of what was once the Senior Recitation Room, and  
made over into " the small chapel," has been for more than forty  
years the chief place where officers and students have come to-  
gether for their religious meetings, whether lectures or prayer-  
meetings, and has witnessed more scenes of deep religious inter-  
est, and is more hallowed in the memory of teachers and pupils  
than any other place in the College buildings or on the College  
grounds. Next to this in the recollections of the pious students,  
perhaps, are the four recitation rooms on the first floor where  
the classes have held their weekly religious meetings ever since  
the rooms have been in existence, 1 and which have thus been  
history of the College Church : " On the evening previous [to  
the communion,] September 25, 1869, a special meeting of the  
church was called, and elected E. S. Snell and Edward Hitch-  
cock as permanent deacons of the church. The practice here-  
tofore had been to select two of the Senior class to serve for  
one year." There were pleasant things about the old usage.  
But the new arrangement which has now existed two or three  
years, avoids some evils and dangers incidental to the old, and  
has proved highly acceptable to all the members. We may here  
add, that Prof. Snell has been clerk of the church since the  
death of Prof. Fiske ; and all our records are in the handwrit-  
ing of these two honored and beloved Professors.  
 
1 The three lower classes have had their class meetings in the Greek, Latin and  
Mathematical Rooms of the old chapel ever since the building was erected. The  
Senior class held its meeting in the old Senior Eecitation Room, (alias Theological  
Koom,) till that was united with the Rhetorical Room to form the small Chapel.  
 
