CHAPTER V.  
 
EFFORTS TO UNITE WILLIAMS COLLEGE AND THE INSTITUTION  
College, the question of removing Williams College to some  
more central part of Massachusetts was agitated among its  
friends and in its Board of Trustees. At that time Williams  
College had two buildings and fifty-eight students, with two  
professors and two tutors. The library contained fourteen  
hundred volumes. The funds were reduced and the income fell  
short of the expenditures. Many of the friends and supporters  
of the College were fully persuaded that it could not be sus-  
tained in its present location. The chief ground of this per-  
suasion was the extreme difficulty of access to it.  
 
" It is difficult at this day," says the late Governor Emory  
Washburn, who entered in 1815, " to make one understand the  
perfect isolation of the spot during my residence in College.  
Nothing in the form of a stage-coach or vehicle for public  
communication ever entered the town. Once a week a soli-  
tary messenger, generally on horseback, came over the Florida  
Mountain, bringing our newspapers and letters from Boston and  
the eastern part of the State. Once a week a Mr. Green came  
up from the south, generally in a one-horse wagon, bringing  
the county newspapers printed at Stockbridge and Pittsfield.  
And by similar modes, and at like intervals, we heard from Troy  
and Albany." .... "It was scarcely less difficult to reach the  
place by private than by public conveyance, except by one's own  
means of transit. My home was near the center of the State, 1  
 
1 Leicester.  
 
and, as iny resources were too limited to make use of a private  
conveyance, I was compelled to rely -upon stage and chance.  
My route was by stage to Pittsfield, and thence by a providen-  
tial team or carriage the remainder of my journey. I have often  
smiled as I have recalled with what persevering assiduity I way-  
laid every man who passed by the hotel, in order to find some  
one who would consent to take as a passenger a luckless wight  
in pursuit of an education under such difficulties. I think I am  
warranted in saying that I made that passage in every form and  
shape of team and vehicle, generally a loaded one, which the  
ingenuity of man had, up to that time, ever constructed. My  
bones ache at the mere recollection.  
 
" Those who came from ' Parson Hallock's ' and other localities  
upon and over the mountain, between there and the Connecticut  
River, were generally fortunate enough to find their way singly  
by means of one-horse wagons, or in larger groups in some capa-  
cious farm- wagon fitted and furnished for the occasion." l  
 
After reading this graphic description by a distinguished  
alumnus, given for the express purpose of enabling the readers  
of the History of the College " to understand the question of its  
removal in its true light," no one will be surprised that the ques-  
tion of removal to some more accessible part of the State was  
agitated among its Trustees, Faculty and students, as well as  
among its patrons and friends.  
 
At the same meeting of the Board of Trustees at which Prof.  
Moore was elected President of Williams' College, May 2, 1815,  
Dr. Packard of Shelburne introduced the following motion :  
" That a committee of six persons be appointed to take into  
consideration the removal of the College to some other part of  
the Commonwealth, to make all necessary inquiries which have  
a bearing on the subject, and report at the next meeting." The  
motion was adopted, and at the next meeting of the Board in  
 
1 See GOT. Emory Washburn's Introduction to the History of Williams College.  
Prof. Snell gave a similar account of his experience in going to and from Wil-  
liamstown. Ordinarily his father, who was one of the Trustees, carried him over  
in his chaise. But he never thought of going home to North Brookfield oftener  
than once a year. And then the way in which the students piled their baggage, into  
 
September, the committee reported, that " a removal of Williams  
College from Williamstown is inexpedient at the present time,  
and under existing circumstances."  
 
But the question of removal thus raised in the Board of  
Trustees and thus negatived only "at the present time and under  
existing circumstances," continued to be agitated. The Frank-  
lin County Association of Congregational ministers had already  
become impressed with the conviction that " a College in some  
central town in old Hampshire County would be likely to flour-  
ish and would be promotive of knowledge and virtue in the  
State," and at their meeting in Shelburne, May 10, 1815, they  
voted unanimously that the town of Amherst appeared to them  
to be the most eligible place for locating such an Institution. 1  
President Moore was from the first decidedly and avowedly in  
favor of the removal. When he was invited to the presidency,  
" it was represented to him by one who spoke in behalf of the  
Trustees, that it would without doubt be removed ; and that the  
only question was in which of several towns named the Institu-  
tion should be located." 2 The College did indeed prosper under  
his personal popularity and his wise administration, notwithstand-  
ing all its external disadvantages. Students accompanied him  
from Dartmouth and from Worcester County where he had been  
settled in the ministry ; in three years from 1815 to 1818, the  
number increased from fifty-eight to ninety-one ; and this in-  
crease, which was chiefly if not wholly, due to his personal influ-  
ence, has been unjustly and ungenerously used as an argument  
against him. But it only suggested to him how much greater  
and better a work he might hope to do for education and relig-  
ion, under more advantageous circumstances.  
 
In September, 1818, the Convention of delegates from the  
central counties of Massachusetts of which we have narrated  
the history in the previous chapter, met in Amherst, and recom-  
mended " the establishment of a College in connection with the  
Charitable Institution there," and " that such preparations and  
arrangements be made as will accommodate students at the In-  
stitution as soon as possible." At a special meeting of the Board  
 
of Trustees of Amherst Academy, October 26, 1818, the Rev.  
John Fiske, Noah Webster, Esq., and Nathaniel Smith, Esq.,  
were appointed a committee to confer with the Board of  
Trustees of Williams College at their session to be held in  
Williamstown on the second Tuesday of November, to com-  
municate to them the result of that Convention, and to make  
suitable statements and explanations respecting it. In pursu-  
ance of this appointment the committee repaired to Williams-  
town and presented to the Board of Trustees of Williams Col-  
lege, at their meeting on the 10th of November, a copy of the  
proceedings and resolutions of the Convention, and also made  
such verbal communications as they supposed to be useful and  
proper. To these communications no answer was given. But  
at this meeting, the Board of Trustees resolved that it was ex-  
pedient to remove the College on certain conditions. President  
Moore advocated the removal, and even expressed his purpose  
to resign the office of President unless it could be effected, inas-  
much as when he accepted the presidency, he had no idea that  
the College was to remain at Williamstown, but was authorized  
to expect that it would be removed to Hampshire County. Nine  
to some more central part of the State whenever sufficient funds  
can be obtained to defray the necessary expenses incurred and  
the losses sustained by removal, and to secure the prosperity of  
the College, and when a fair prospect shall be presented of ob-  
taining for the Institution the united support and patronage of  
the friends of literature and religion in the western part of the  
to which place the College shall be removed and to produce  
harmony and union, the following gentlemen, viz. : Hon. James  
Kent, Chancellor of the State of New York, Hon. Nathaniel  
Smith, Judge of the Supreme Court of Connecticut, and the  
Rev. Seth Payson, D. D., of Rindge, N. H., be a committee to  
visit the towns in Hampshire County and determine the place  
 
to which the . College shall be removed ; the Trustees pledging  
themselves to abide by their decision, provided the requisite  
sum be raised."  
 
In view of these resolutions, the Trustees of Amherst Acad-  
emy, at their annual meeting, November 17, 1818, appointed  
Noah Webster, Esq., the Rev. John Fiske, the Rev. Edwards  
Whipple, the Rev. Joshua Crosby, and Nathaniel Smith, Esq., to  
be a committee, to wait upon the committee appointed to locate  
Williams College, to represent to them the claims of the town  
of Amherst to be the seat of the College. In May, 1819, the  
locating committee visited several towns in Franklin and Hamp-  
shire Counties, and among others the town of Amherst. And  
the committee of the Trustees of Amherst Academy waited  
upon them at their meeting in Northampton, and laid before  
them a carefully prepared written statement of the claims and  
advantages of Amherst. In regard to the point to which para-  
mount importance had all along been attached, viz., a central  
and accessible situation for the College, the committee say:  
" The territory to be particularly accommodated by this College  
comprehends the counties of Berkshire, Hampshire, Hampden,  
Franklin and Worcester. Many persons in Middlesex and Nor-  
folk Counties also take a particular interest in this Institution.  
The hill in the center of the west road in Amherst on which the  
church stands, is within about two miles of the geographical cen-  
ter of this territory, taking Pittsfield on the west and Worcester  
on the east as the two extremes. It is equally central between  
the limits of the Commonwealth on the north and south. In  
addition to this fact, it may be observed that it is almost equally  
distant from the University of Cambridge, the College in Provi-  
dence and the College in New Haven, the distance from each  
being about eighty-five miles. It is a hundred miles from Union  
College in Schenectady, and from Dartmouth College in Han-  
over, and a greater distance from Middlebury College." They  
also add that " the roads leading to and from this town are as  
good as any roads in the country." They further insist on the  
elevation, salubrity and beauty of the site, comprehending  
" thirty towns in three counties within a single view, from  
 
ish in Amherst may be seen." Much stress is laid on the fact  
that Amherst is likely always to remain chiefly an agricultural  
town of limited population, where students will be remote from  
the corrupting influences of great manufacturing and commer-  
cial cities, where habits of economy and simplicity will prevail,  
and where the expenses of education will be comparatively  
small ; and it is instructive to observe the standard of expense  
implied in the following argument : " Great numbers of men can  
arguments and statements presented to the locating committee  
in favor of removing the College to Amherst. The commit-  
tee, however," he candidly and calmly adds, " were unanimous  
Arnherst Academy had appointed a committee to solicit sub-  
scriptions to the Charity Fund, and also for the, foundation and  
support of a College, to be connected with the same as recom-  
mended by the Convention. But in consequence of the proceed-  
ings of the corporation of Williams College in resolving to re-  
move that Institution, the Trustees of Amherst Academy sus-  
printed address to the public, assigning their reasons for propo-  
sing to remove that Institution, and soliciting donations to increase  
the funds and promote its prosperity in the proposed location at  
Northampton. In this address they say, that since its establish-  
ment in 1793 other Colleges have sprung up about it and almost  
wholly withdrawn the patronage it formerly received from the  
North and the West, and that owing to the want of support,  
the funds have become so reduced that the income falls short of  
the expenditures. They also express their high approval of the  
 
object of the Charitable Institution at Amherst and their partic-  
ular desire that it should be united with the College at North-  
ampton. A copy of this address was sent to the Trustees of  
Amherst Academy enclosed in a letter from President Moore,  
dated July 6, 1819. Under date of August 18, 1819, the Trus-  
tees of Amherst Academy returned an answer in which they say,  
that " in their opinion a union between the College and the Char-  
itable Institution would be conducive to the interests of litera-  
ture, science and religion in the western section of Massachu-  
setts," that " the constitution of the Charity Fund opened the door  
for that union," and " if a plan of union could be devised not  
to petition the Legislature for permission to remove the College  
to Northampton. To this application, Mr. Webster says, " the  
Trustees of Amherst Academy made no opposition and took no  
measures to defeat it." In February, 1820, the petition was laid  
before the Legislature. The committee from both Houses, to  
whom it was referred, after a careful examination of the whole  
subject, reported that it was neither lawful nor expedient to re-  
move the College, and the Legislature, taking the same view, re-  
jected the petition. The Trustees of Amherst Academy, who  
had been quietly awaiting the issue of the application, judged  
that the way was now open for them to proceed with their orig-  
inal design according to the advice of the Convention, and at  
their meeting in March, 1820, they took measures for collecting  
the subscriptions to the Charity Fund, raising additional subscrip-  
tions, erecting a suitable building, and opening the Institution as  
soon as possible for the reception of students. Thus the long  
and exciting discussion touching the removal of Williams College  
and the location of a College in some more central town of old  
Hampshire County, at length came to an end, and the contend-  
ing parties now directed all their energies to building up the In-  
stitutions of their choice.  
 
Few questions have agitated the good people of Western  
Massachusetts more generally or more deeply than this ; and it  
 
many generations it was such questions the locating and build-  
ing of colleges, school-houses, and churches questions pertain-  
ing to education and religion, that always stirred them to the  
lowest depths. It is amusing and instructive to look over the  
files of newspapers of that day. They are full of this contro-  
versy. During the five years through which the war lasted, the  
local newspapers at Pittsfield, Northampton and Greenfield, kept  
up a running fire continually, communication answering commu-  
nication, and editorial meeting editorial, and scarcely a number  
appearing without something on this engrossing subject. The  
city press, particularly the religious papers in Boston and New  
York, entered warmly into the discussion, and as if there was  
not room in the periodical press, pamphlet after pamphlet was  
circulated through the community. In the characteristic man-  
ner and spirit of New England, the warfare was carried into the  
pulpit, churches took sides in the controversy, associations of  
ministers recorded their sentiments, and conventions 1 gave forth  
utterances for or against the removal, for or against each partic-  
ular location. At length the question entered the arena of poli-  
tics, and candidates for the Legislature were asked how they  
would vote in regard to the site of the College. 2  
 
At Williamstown, of course, the excitement ran high. The  
people of the town sent in a spirited remonstrance against the re-  
moval of the College, and certain lewd fellows of the baser sort,  
holding President Moore largely responsible, vented their resent-  
ment against him by shaving and cutting off the tail of his horse.  
And the good President drove his horse down to Amherst in  
that condition, saying he did not see why the folly of a few  
Williams College to that place, Dr. Moore presided, and Dr. Nelson was the Secre-  
tary; and Dr. Snell, Dr. Humphrey, Dr. Woodbridge, Mr. Gould, Mr. Thomas  
Shepard and Mr. John Keep were appointed members of a committee to raise  
 
horse. An alumnus of Williams who was a member of the Col-  
lege at the time, remembers seeing on a wall devoted to carica-  
tures in one of the College halls, a picture of the College on  
wheels, with a large number of students harnessed to it, and Dr.  
Packard's well-known form and features, mounted on his old  
Moore were regarded as especially active and influential in the  
effort for the union of Williams College with the Institution at  
Amherst. Doubtless they were so. They never sought to con-  
ceal the fact, nor to shift the responsibility. Fully persuaded in  
their own minds, that the interests of education and true religion  
demanded the establishment of a College in some central town  
of old Hampshire County, they labored openly and earnestly to  
persuade others. They were equally sincere and undisguised in  
their conviction that there could not be two colleges in Western  
Massachusetts, and that Williams College could not prosper in  
its present location. Facts have since shown that they were  
mistaken in this conviction. But no one who looks at the facts  
as they then were, will wonder that they cherished it, and cher-  
ishing it they could not be true to themselves or to the cause  
which lay nearest their hearts, without acting as they did. At  
the most they can only be charged with an error in judgment.  
 
The warmest friends and supporters of Williams College who  
knew the man, acquit Dr. Moore so far at least as his motives  
were concerned. Gov. Washburn, an alumnus and a Trustee,  
says : " Conflicting opinions have been entertained respecting his  
efforts to have the College removed ; and though it was an un-  
fortunate measure both for the College and himself, I am unwill-  
ing to ascribe his conduct to any improper motives." 2 Rev. Dr.  
Brigham, Secretary of the American Bible Society, in whose  
Senior year the removal of Williams College was the absorbing  
theme, says : " The President and the students who resided east  
 
1 Mr. Durfee in his History of Williams College says : " Only a few of the stu-  
dents were in favor of retaining it in Williamstown." The facts narrated in the  
text indicate at least strong party feeling against removal.  
 
2 History of Williams College, p. 19.  
 
of the mountains, were for removal. I, as a Berkshire man, was  
of course, averse to the measure. But while many censured the  
be charged with the responsibility of originating the movement  
for the removal of Williams College. Thus much is demon-  
strated by the simple fact that the movement originated among  
the Trustees of Williams College themselves before Dr. Moore  
was appointed President of that College, and before the Trust-  
ees of Amherst Academy had made them any proposition or com-  
munication on the subject. " No proposal of the kind ever went  
from Amherst or was even thought of, till after the Trustees of  
that College were so effectually convinced of the importance of  
having it removed to a more favorable situation as to appoint a  
respectable committee out of their own number to make the  
necessary inquiries on the subject. The subject of removal, as  
was proper, originated with them, and their committee was ap-  
pointed, before the person (Dr. Moore) who has since thought  
it his duty to accept the presidency of this Institution (Amherst),  
was made President of that College" (Williams). Sucji is  
President Moore's own vindication of himself and the Trustees  
of Amherst, in an " Appeal to the Public " written in March,  
" In conclusion, the committee pray leave to state that they do  
most highly appreciate and most profoundly respect the motives  
of the petitioners ; these are unquestionably founded in a truly  
honorable and elevated desire to extend the usefulness of this  
respectable College in promoting learning, virtue, piety and re-  
ligion." "Father Hallock"of Plainfield, an Israelite indeed,  
in whom there was no guile, whose family school was the chief  
feeder of Williams College, who sent twelve out of thirteen  
students admitted at one Commencement and had forty of his  
 
fidence, intimacy and affection from President Moore or Dr.  
Packard, but, though residing on the mountains, co-operated with  
them in their efforts to establish a College in the Connecticut  
Valley, and in his poverty subscribed to the Charity Fund and  
other contributions in aid of Amherst College.  
 
Whether one College would have been better than two for  
Western Massachusetts, and if there was to be but one, whether  
that one should have been at Williamstown, Northampton or  
Amherst,' are questions which we are not now called to answer.  
But that these good men had the best interests of learning and  
religion at heart and were foreseeing and far-seeing beyond most  
men in their generation w,e have no doubt. They certainly  
did not overestimate the importance of a College in Hampshire  
County, and their wise plans and persevering efforts have re-  
sulted, under the overruling providence of God, in the upbuild-  
ing of two Colleges, each of which has far exceeded not only the  
one which then existed, but the most sanguine hopes of the  
founders of either, in its prosperity and usefulness.  
 
