CHAPTER XXVI.  
 
THE WAR.  
 
A FRENCH statesman and scholar has written of our late war as  
" The Uprising of a Great Nation." It well deserves the name.  
The people, of all ages and both sexes, from every rank, class  
and condition in life, rose up as one man to crush the great re-  
bellion, and to preserve the national existence. The veterans of  
former wars resumed their epaulettes or re-enlisted in the ranks.  
Boys under age begged permission of their parents to go to the  
war, and smuggled themselves into the army, or became drum-  
mer boys, messengers, aids in any way to the patriotic service.  
Women presented regiments with their colors, prepared equip-  
ments and supplies for the soldiers, nursed the sick in the hospi-  
tals, ministered to the wounded and the dying on the field of  
battle. Professional men, clergymen, physicians, teachers, civil-  
ians, educated men generally who, by law and usage, are exempt  
from military service, girded on the sword, buckled on the knap-  
sack, bore the hardships of the camp, and braved the dangers of  
the battle-field. But no class of men, as statistics prove, con-  
tributed in so large proportion to their numbers, and none con-  
tributed an element of such military value and moral power as  
the graduates and under-graduates of our Colleges. Several  
of the Colleges in the Middle and Western States were closed  
for a longer or shorter period of the war ; and the Eastern Col-  
leges felt scarcely less the depletion of their numbers and the  
diminution of their strength. It is sufficient honor for Amherst  
not to have fallen behind her sisters in devotion to the cause  
if is her pride and glory to have borne her full share in "the bur-  
 
At the first outbreak of hostilities, before the war had actu-  
ally commenced, with the ardor characteristic of youth and  
College life, the under-graduates of Amherst volunteered their  
services and offered a company to the Governor. On that dark  
and portentous Sunday in April, 1861, which followed the  
fall of Fort Sumter, and the attack of the mob upon the Massa-  
chusetts regiments passing through Baltimore on their way to  
Washington, when other troops from Massachusetts and New  
York, forbidden to pass by that thoroughfare, were making their  
way slowly by way of Annapolis, and when it was feared that  
the rebels might already have seized upon the capital, the, wri-  
ter of this History preached in the College chapel on tliemes  
suited to the circumstances, and in a strain intended to in-  
spire courage, heroism and self-sacrificing devotion. And while  
the Professor was preaching, or at least as soon as he had  
done, the students were already practising what he preached.  
They drew up a form of enlistment which some fifty or sixty  
of them subscribed, and in which they offered themselves to  
the military service of the country in this emergency, deem-  
ing it a Christian duty, not unbecoming the Lord's clay to  
enlist in such a war, and adopting as their own the sentiment  
which they so much admired in their ancient classics : " Dulce  
et decorum est pro patria mori." The President's son was the  
first to put his name to this paper ; a son of one of the Profess-  
ors was the next to enter the lists. The Governor declined to  
accept the proffered service, at the same time intimating that  
the day might come when duty would call them to the sacrifice.  
The immediate peril soon passed by; and a general military  
drill under a competent military officer 1 took the place of the  
proposed company of volunteers. But both the young men,  
specially alluded to above, afterwards enlisted, and one of them  
was among the earliest sacrifices which our College offered on  
the altar of the country. Many of the other volunteers, I know  
rot just how many, found their way into the army, some before  
and some after their graduation. Seventy-eight names are re-  
corded on the roll of under-graduates who served in the army  
 
1 Col. Luke Lyraan of Northampton, afterwards Colonel of the Twenty-seventh  
 
or navy of the United States in the course of the war. Our  
classes, which had been steadily increasing in numbers for sev-  
eral years, were now so reduced, that some of them seemed  
almost like the thinned ranks of an army after a battle. One  
of the Professors set the example of volunteering early in the  
war, and it was followed by one other officer of the College and  
by many of the students. Prof. William S. Clark, commissioned  
as Major of the Twenty-first Regiment of Massachusetts Volun-  
teers, August 21, 1861, and promoted rapidly to the rank of  
Lieutenant-Colonel and Colonel, fought in most of the principal  
battles of the first two years of the war till his regiment was  
reduced to the merest skeleton. His friend, Dr. N. S. Manross,  
who, for one year, filled the vacancy in the Faculty occasioned  
by his absence at the end of the year, followed him to the war,  
and at the very opening of his first battle, the battle of Antie-  
tam, he fell as he was leading on his company to the conflict.  
Thus two of the officers of College went directly from the chair  
of the Professor to the tent and the field of battle. Two other  
members of the Faculty were represented in the army by sons  
who were also sons of the College. Three sons of the lamented  
Prof. Adams enlisted, two of whom early lost their lives in  
the service. Add to these connecting links the almost four-  
score students who left their classes, most of them, for the pur-  
pose of entering the army, and many more who engaged in the  
service immediately after their graduation, and it will be read-  
ily seen how many bonds of sympathy and interest were thus  
established between the College and the camps and battle-  
fields during the war. Every mail was expected with anxious  
interest. The newspapers were watched, especially after every  
battle, and the lists of the killed and wounded were examined  
with trembling solicitude. In some instances false alarms were  
thus communicated, occasioning much distress or anxiety at the  
time, but followed by speedy relief, and attended perhaps with  
not a little amusement. Col. Clark was reported first as cap-  
tured and then as killed in the battle of Chantilly. A tele-  
graphic despatch was even sent to the army giving directions  
for sending on his body. But the Colonel soon answered it him-  
self saying that he still had need of it for his own use, and a  
 
few 'days later he presented himself in person at the door of one  
of the Professors with whom Mrs. Clark was passing a few days,  
and ringing the bell, inquired if the Widow Clark was there ! l  
 
Sometimes the sad intelligence, conveyed by newspaper, letter  
or telegraph, conveyed perhaps through the medium of a friend  
and broken as kindly and tenderly as possible to the afflicted  
individual or the bereaved family was too soon confirmed by  
the arrival of the lifeless body. Then followed the funeral ser-  
vice, the great congregation in the chapel or the church, the  
prayers and dirges, the address or commemorative discourse,  
and the long procession of students and citizens, mourners all,  
to the place of burial. Amherst was witness to not a few" such  
scenes in the course of the war.  
 
The absent soldiers were remembered daily at morning and  
evening prayers and in the Sabbath services of the chapel.  
Days of fasting and prayer, and other special occasions, called  
forth discourses and addresses fitted to commemorate the events  
of the war arid keep alive the patriotic feeling. The war was  
the chief theme of discussion by the students in the class-room,  
in the societ} 7 meeting, at exhibitions and Commencements. In  
a community where impressions are so easily made and so read-  
ily communicated as among young men in College, such a war  
as that of the Great Rebellion, could not but awaken the live-  
liest sympathies of the students.  
 
Two or three students from Tennessee, and one or two each  
from Missouri and Virginia, born and bred under the influence  
of the State-Rights heresy and carried away by Southern sym-  
pathies, left College at the outbreak of the war, much to the  
regret of their classmates and companions, and more to their own  
regret after the rebellion came to such a disastrous issue. They  
were treated with the utmost courtesy and kindness at their  
departure. With these exceptions, the current of feeling flowed  
without an eddy or a ripple, fresh, strong and warm, not to say  
hot, all in one direction there was not a disloyal or an indiffer-  
ent officer or student, in the whole Institution.  
 
1 Col. Clark denies having returned this answer, I believe. But he would have  
been very likely to return such an answer; if not true to the letter, it bears internal  
 
The "Roll of the graduates and under-graduates of Amherst  
College who served in the army or navy of the United States dur-  
ing the War of the Rebellion," printed in 1871, records the names  
and in brief the services of two hundred and forty-seven men, of  
whom seventy-eight were under-graduates and one hundred and  
sixty-nine were graduates. When the semi-centennial catalogue  
was issued in 1872, the number of graduates, now more fully as-  
certained, had grown to one hundred and ninety-five whose names  
are distinguished by the double dagger. Among these there were  
six former Tutors of the College. Two of these sacrificed their  
lives in the service. Both of them were, of course, superior  
scholars, both Salutatorians at Commencement. Both relin-  
quished the successful practice of a profession in which they  
stood high and had the promise of distinction and usefulness.  
 
Dr. Charles Ellery Washburn, of the Class of '38, Tutor in  
1841 and 1842, was well established in medical practice in Fre-  
donia, N. Y., but broke away from a wide circle of families in  
which he was trusted, and a community in which he was uni-  
versally honored and beloved, and, after spending nearly three  
years in the service, sacrificed his own life to his zeal for the life  
and health of the soldiers who were entrusted to his skill and  
care. Though past the military age, he entered the service in  
the dark days after McClellan's retreat from Richmond, saying  
it was time for every man that was a man to do something for  
his country. " Commissioned 1862, Surgeon of the One Hun-  
dred and Twelfth New York Volunteers ; promoted Brigade  
Surgeon and Medical Director of Gen. Ames' Division of Gen.  
Terry's command ; participated in some of the bloodiest battles  
of the war, the last of which was the storming of Fort Fisher ;  
taken sick with typhus fever at Wilmington, N. C., while caring  
for returned Union prisoners, and died April 10, 1865.'' Such  
is his brief and suggestive war record.  
 
Rev. Samuel Fisk, of the Class of '48, Tutor from 1852 to  
1855, after a pastorate of seven years in Madison, Ct., in which  
he had struck his roots deep in the confidence and affections of  
his people, tore himself from their embrace, enlisted as a private  
 
Chancellorsville, Fredericksburg, Gettysburg, and the Wilder-  
ness ; was twice promoted for gallant conduct in these battles;  
became First Lieutenant, and Captain of his company; was on  
special service as Inspector of Brigade, and Aid on the staff of  
Gen. Carroll ; was taken prisoner at Chancellorsville, carried to  
Richmond and reported among the killed; and being mortally  
wounded in the battle of the Wilderness, May 6, 1864, died May  
22, at Fredericksburg, Va.  
 
It will be observed that Capt. Fisk enlisted as a private. He  
did so, not from necessity but from choice, for the sake of the  
example to his flock and to the community. One other, qut of  
the six former Tutors, also enlisted as a private. This suggests  
a circumstance with which I have been much struck in looking  
over our war records. It is the large number of men who, at  
their enlistment, entered the ranks. Surprised at a general ob-  
servation of the fact, I was led to a careful examination of the  
roll, and I discovered that of the two hundred and forty-seven  
names on the roll, ninety-five, or nearly thirty-nine per cent, of  
the whole, enlisted as privates. Some of them were immediately  
elected to some office and received commissions. The greater  
part of the others were promoted to one grade or another, and  
generally to successive grades, as the reward of meritorious con-  
duct or faithful service. A few were still serving in the ranks',  
when they fell on the field of battle, died in the hospital or the  
prison, or from sickness or other sufficient reasons, received their  
discharge. Such men fill a smaller space and shine with less  
brilliancy on the page of history than major-generals and corps-  
commanders, but their patriotism is perhaps more unquestionable,  
ber of chaplains that appear on it. This might be expected, as  
a matter of course, in a College which was founded for the edu-  
cation of ministers, and whose graduates have been, in such  
large proportion, pastors and preachers. Some of our minis-  
ters who went to the war, like Capt. Fisk and Capt. Bissell, 1 pre-  
ferred to sink, for the time, the minister in the man and the  
 
patriot, and enlisted, like other men, directly in the military ser-  
vice. It may be doubted whether they did not, by this very  
means, enhance their ministerial and Christian influence. Cer-  
tainly they did not, for a moment, conceal or disguise, still less  
lay aside the character that becomes a minister of the gospel.  
Others again, choosing to retain the ministerial office, were com-  
missioned as chaplains. But not a few of these, I ween, were  
fighting chaplains, and were 'often seen with the soldier's gun  
and knapsack on the march, while, in the heat of battle, often  
they could hardly be distinguished from other combatants. Am-  
herst furnished in all thirty-five chaplains, some of whom were  
pastors of some of the largest and best churches in the city or  
the country, and not a few sacrificed their health and periled  
their lives in the service. A specimen or two will show the sort  
appointed Chaplain Fiftieth New York Regiment (Engineers ,),  
brigaded under Generals Woodbury, Butterfield and Benham ;  
with Army of Potomac under Generals McClellan, Burnside,  
Hooker, and Meade. In active service at siege of Yorktown, the  
march to Hampton, battle of Mary's Heights, and below Freder-  
icksburg ; during campaign in the Wilderness detained at Wash-  
ington with Brigade Hospital. Sick with Virginia fever during  
campaign on the Chickahominy, but never lost a day. Mus-  
tered out September 20, 1864.  
 
Class of '42: Lauren Armsby, 1 commissioned January, 1863,  
Chaplain Eighth Minnesota Volunteers. In battle with Sioux  
Indians, valley of the Little Missouri, August 8, 1864, Gen. Sully ;  
near Murfreesboro', December 4th to 7th, 1864, Gen. Milroy.  
For a month cut off from all supplies at Fortress Rosecrans;  
from there marched to Clifton, Tenn., then transported to Wash-  
ington; ordered to Fort Fisher, thence to Beaufort and New-  
bern ; March 21, 1865, joined Sherman's army at Goldsboro',  
and started in pursuit of Gen. Johnston ; on Gen. Lee's surren-  
der, left Gen. Sherman at Raleigh and marched to Charlotte,  
N. C. Mustered out there, July 11, 1865.  
 
Class of '45: Charles Louis Wood worth, commissioned 1  
March 30, 1862, Chaplain Twenty-seventh Massachusetts Vol-  
unteers. In action at Trenton, N. C., July 26, 1862 ; Ball's  
Ford, November 2, 1862 ; siege of Washington, N. C., March 30  
to April 16 ; Gum Swamp expedition, April 28, 1863 ; battle at  
Walthal's Junction, May 15, 1864 ; Arrowfield Church, Va., May  
9, 1864 ; Drury's Bluff, May 16, 1864 ; Cold Harbor, June 1st to  
3d, 1864, and Petersburg, June 18, 1864 ; under Generals Burn-  
side, Foster, Wild, and Butler. Mustered out June 20, 1864.  
 
Class of '50 : Jacob Merrill Manning, commissioned August,  
1862, at Boston, Chaplain Forty-third Massachusetts Volunteers ;  
served in battles of Kinston, Whitehall and Goldsboro', N. Gj in.  
movements around Newbern and Little Washington, spring of  
1863 ; returned home July 1, 1863 ; dangerously sick with ma-  
larious fever six months, from the effects of which hardly yet  
recovered.  
 
The College furnished thirty or more surgeons to the war,  
some of whom, as, for example, Dr. Washburn, Class of '38, and  
Dr. Hoyt, Class of '55, sacrificed their lives in the service.  
 
Passing from chaplains and surgeons to other officers, we find  
on inspecting the Roll and noting their rank at the close of their  
service, three brigadier-generals (two of them major-generals by  
brevet,) nine colonels, twelve lieutenant-colonels, nine majors,  
twenty-five captains, seventeen first lieutenants, seventeen sec-  
ond lieutenants, nineteen sergeants, five corporals, besides a few  
ensigns, color-bearers, and several adjutants, quartermasters and  
paymasters of different ranks. Not a very brilliant show of su-  
perior officers in comparison with some of the less clerical Col-  
leges of the East, or some of the more belligerent institutions  
of the West ; but showing a proportionate number of promo-  
tions far beyond the average among soldiers drawn from the  
community generally, and thus illustrating forcibly the value of  
the higher education in the military service. Never before, nor  
since, not even in the Prussian army in the late Franco-German  
war, were there so many bayonets that could read, and so many  
shoulder straps that could think, as there were in the army of  
 
1 Then pastor of church in East Amherst; now Secretary of American Mission-  
this element of intellectual and moral power no other communi-  
ties contributed so largely as the Colleges ; and among the Col-  
leges none more than Amherst.  
 
No general officer from Amherst no officer of higher grade  
than captain lost his life in the service. But it was not for  
want of personal bravery as every one knows who is acquainted  
with the men, nor for lack of dangers, hardships and hair-breadth  
escapes as any one will see who reads even the brief epitome of  
service contained in the war " records " of such men as Gen.  
Caldwell, Gen. Thomas and Gen. Walker, or almost any of the  
Colonels and other staff officers who passed alive, but few of  
them unhurt, through the perils of the war.  
 
We have no eulogies or obituaries to write of men who have  
fallen at the head of a corps or division or in sight of a whole  
army, and whose death has caused mourning through the nation.  
Our roll of military heroes wants the halo of glory that invests  
such names as those of Winthrop and Sedgwick. But braver  
men never fought or fell than Capt. Fisk ('48,) and Lieut.  
Pierce ('53,) and Sergt. Merrick ('60,) and Lieut. Pennell ('63,)  
and Color-Bearer Clary ('64,) and Adjt. Stearns ('63,) and their  
comrades in College and in arms, of whom thirty-five sacrificed  
their lives in the service. The entire list of these fallen heroes  
is as follows. Let their names at least be recorded in the His-  
tory of the College, and their memory be enshrined in the grat-  
itude of our hearts :  
DAVID Louis JOHNS, '32.  
JAMES AVERILL, '37.  
CHARLES ELLERY WASHBURN, ;  
SAMUEL FISK, '48.  
EZRA F. BAILEY, '53.  
HENRY REUBEN PIERCE, '53.  
EDWARD BURXS OLCOTT, '54.  
EDWARD SMITH GILBERT, '55.  
DIXIE CROSBY HOYT, '55.  
EDWIN COLEMAN HAND, '56.  
JOSHUA BARKER FLINT HOBBS,  
HENRY MARTYN KELLOGG, '98.  
38. Lucius LATHROP MERRICK, '60.  
 
HENRY A. HUBBARD, '61.  
'58. ALBERT DEAN AMSDEN, '64.  
 
FRANCIS AMSDEN CLARY, '64.  
have been suitably commemorated by memoirs or memorial vol-  
umes which have been given to the public and widely read in  
the army and by the community. 1 The others will in due time,  
doubtless, have their lives written more at length in a history  
of the graduates of Amherst College. Meanwhile we can only  
refer our readers to the brief epitome of their services in the  
published " Roll." And yet I can not refrain from giving a  
single specimen by way of illustration. Christopher Pennell left  
College in 1862 for the sake of entering the army, was appointed  
Sergeant of the Thirty-fourth Massachusetts Volunteers, pro-  
moted to the rank of Lieutenant, and placed on the staff of  
Gen. Thomas, and fell in his first engagement, the assault which  
followed the springing of the mine at Petersburg, July 30, 1864.  
On the morning of that fatal engagement, the General to whom  
he stood in the relation of a personal Aid, had assigned him a  
place in the rear of the column, but yielded to the young man's  
entreaties and allowed him a position by his side in the van.  
The brigade charged, and two-thirds of the officers and one-third  
of the men who went in, soon fell under the concentrated fire  
of the enemy. The troops began to waver, Pennell seized the  
brigade colors, advanced with his sword in one hand and the  
flag in the other, calling upon his men to follow him, and fell  
far in front of the column ; and of those who rushed to his res-  
cue, all but one shared his fate. All attempts to recover the body  
even were fruitless, and he found a grave where he fell. His  
name was mentioned with honor in the report of the commander  
of the brigade : " Here Lieut. Pennell was killed, riddled through  
 
and actions were splendid, I might say, heroic, sacrificing delib-  
erately and knowingly his life in the hope of rendering his  
country some service."  
 
Gladly would we multiply and extend these illustrations of  
the bravery of our brethren. But our limits forbid; and we  
have already gone beyond the bounds of propriety perhaps in  
specifying any when all are alike deserving.  
 
Thirteen of our soldiers were confined in rebel prisons, some  
of them dragged in succession through two, three or four of  
those places of more than fiendish torture, and two of them  
welcomed death as a blessed deliverance from the starvation,  
insults and cruelties, worse than death, to which such prisoners  
were subjected. Some of those who survived, suffered long and  
severely from diseases contracted in those prisons, or escaped per-  
haps, through long journeys by night, after hardships and suffer-  
ings of every kind, making such a record as this : " Taken prison-  
er at Drury's Bluff, May 12, 1864, and confined in Libby, Savan-  
nah, Charleston and Columbia prisons. Escaped November 29,  
1864, and traveled two hundred miles by night through swamps  
and woods to Union lines. Sick with typhoid fever and diph-  
theria. Mustered out at Washington, D. C., February 7, 1865." l  
 
The classes that graduated soon after the opening of the war,  
as might have been expected, furnished the largest number of  
recruits for the service. In this respect '62 is the banner class,  
thirty of its members having gone to the war ; '61 and '63 each  
sent twenty-three ; '64 furnished fifteen ; and '65 twenty-one  
for the service. The Class of '65 lost the largest number ; six  
of its members died in the service, four of whom died of mortal  
wounds received on the field of battle : '63 lost four men, three  
of whom were killed in battle ; '64 lost the same number. The  
other classes above named lost one or two men each upon an  
average.  
 
The graduates of the older classes were, of course, all above  
the military age, and could not be expected to furnish many  
soldiers. But not a few of them, as we learn from our corres-  
pondence, made up for the deficiency, by sending their sons to  
the service. The oldest graduate, whose name appears on our  
 
Roll was Rev. Timothy Robinson Cressey of the Class of '28,  
who went himself as Chaplain of the Second Regiment of Min-  
nesota Volunteers, and took with him five sons into the ser-  
vice. His war record, as given by himself in a letter is so re-  
markable that I can not withhold it from my readers. It is a  
unique species of Home Missionary Report and illustrates the  
character and spirit, if not also substantially the history, of more  
than one of our Amherst home missionaries.  
 
" When the war broke out, I had nine children, seven sons  
and two daughters. When Fort Sumter was fired on, I gath-  
ered my boys around me and told them that their great-gfand-  
father was in the French arid Indian war in 1762 and belonged  
to ' Roger's Rangers ;' that their grandfather was in the Rev-  
olutionary war and fought under Gen. Putnam; that my uncle  
was killed in the war of 1812; that this' rebellion was an un-  
righteous cause and must be put down ; the old flag must not be  
dishonored ; the military dignity of the Cressey family must be  
sustained ; I was in for the war though more than sixty years  
old, and I should be happy to have them follow me. Three  
Col. Horatio Van Cleve commanding. In the battle of * Mill  
Spring,' my regiment did the severest fighting, and providentially  
turned the fortunes of the day. This was the first decisive vic-  
tory gained by the North in the war, and its influence was im-  
mense upon the then depressed spirits of the nation. Immediately  
after this the whole line of the Rebels gave way. Green River,  
Bowling Green, Fort Henry, Fort Donelson and Nashville were  
taken, and our whole lines swept like a mighty avalanche south  
to Pittsburg Landing.  
 
" The severest and the most melancholy duty of my life was  
performed on the evening of the battle of Mill Spring. The  
battle began early in the morning. The ' Long Roll ' sounded  
just after the * Reveille.' The Fourth Kentucky were on picket  
and fought bravely until overwhelmed by Gen. Zollekoffer's  
 
with great slaughter. The Second Minnesota of which I was  
Chaplain, next went in. I ought here in justice to say, that this  
regiment was made up of the very hardiest material of the fron-  
tier, lumber-men fresh from the pineries, river-rnen direct from  
the rafts and steamers, and hunters from the forests and prai-  
ries, with many a highly educated and refined but adventurous  
Yankee. A more resolute, determined, yet noble set of men, I  
think, were not to be found in all our armies. As they went  
into battle, Gen. Thomas, ' Old Pap Thomas,' as we boys fa-  
miliarly called him, rode with Col. Van Cleve directly in their  
rear. As we met that foe sweeping on, as they supposed, to  
sure victory, the shock was terrific. But the Second Minnesota  
stood like a sea-girt rock and never for a moment wavered,  
though some of them crossed guns with the Rebs upon the same  
rails in the fence, and most of them were in an open field stand-  
ing face to face within but few yards of the enemy. The Sec-  
ond Minnesota were supported by the Ninth Ohio Germans,  
Robert McCook commanding, familiarly known as ' Bob Mc-  
Cook's Bloody Dutchmen.' After twenty-seven minutes of  
this desperate struggle, Gen. Thomas gave to the Ninth Ohio  
the command, ' Fix bayonets to the right oblique march.'  
But before the Ninth came to the charge, the Rebs gave way  
before the desperation of the Second Minnesota; and such  
shouts rent the heavens as none but victors can give. One fact  
is an index to the severity of this battle. Upon a spot four rods  
square, I counted twenty-eight dead rebels. This is the more  
be discharged. After the battle, our dead were gathered up  
and brought into camp. And there were twelve of my noble  
Minnesota boys in blue, dear to me as brothers, who lay  
cold in death before me. They were to be buried, how should  
it be done ? Not a board or a slab was to be had in all the re-  
gion nothing, of which we could make a coffin. A grave was  
dug, six feet by sixteen and four feet deep. We then wrapped  
them in all their blood and gore in their overcoats and blankets,  
and in that wild, lonely and desolate region of Kentucky, we  
 
laid them down to the soldier's long repose, and placed the  
green sods upon their bosoms to await the final * roll-call ' of the  
last trump. As this work was going on, there stood near me a  
noble boy in blue, of eighteen summers,, a member of my regi-  
ment. At length with gushing tears and a bursting heart, he  
cried out, ' Fellow-soldiers, all this / can bear. But oh, what  
will dear mother say, when she hears that her Frank is no more.'  
Such scenes must be witnessed to be fully realized.  
 
" I was also in the battle of Pittsburg Landing and Perry-  
ville, and closed with that awful two days' battle of Chickamau-  
ga, where we won a decided victory, though history may not  
record it thus. Three things are certain. 1. The Rebels knew  
all the field, and chose their own ground to fight upon. Our  
generals knew nothing of it. 2. We fought them as four to  
seven. We had 45,000 men and they 75,000. 3. We held the  
stake for which the awful game was played, viz., Chickamauga.  
 
" Two sons were with me on those two fearfully bloody days,  
but God brought us all out safe. In all we served fifteen years  
in the war, were in twenty different battles, and all returned in  
safety without the loss of a life or a limb. All still live, and  
four of us are preaching Christ crucified in four different States,  
Minnesota, Michigan, Illinois and Iowa."  
 
Rev. William A. Hyde of the next class ('29), writes : " I  
had four sons in the war two of them in nearly all the war.  
One of them suffered " deaths oft" in rebel prisons for about ten  
months. He saw Libby, Danville, Andersonville and Florence  
in that time. My eldest son is a teacher in Norwich. My sec-  
ond son is a physician in Brooklyn. My fourth is preparing for  
the ministry in the Theological Department at New Haven, and  
my other three sons are printers, etc., in New York City. My  
family gave eight Republican votes this year, including a son-in-  
law, a member elect of our Legislature."  
 
Rev. Benjamin Schneider, D. D., of the next class ('30), the  
veteran missionary at Aintab in Western Turkey, and the ven-  
erable father and bishop of all the Protestant churches in that  
section, had three sons and a son-in-law in different stages of edu-  
cation in this country, one of them, William Tyler Schneider, a  
 
in the army and one in the navy; and his oldest son, James, a  
young man of rare promise who was preparing to rejoin his father  
in the missionary work, and who entered the army in the spirit  
of a missionary, lest his life in the service. Soon after his death,  
the afflicted father thus wrote to his classmate and friend, the  
author of this History : " It is a sore bereavement, not only to  
us personally, but (humanly speaking) a great loss to our cause  
to which he had devoted his life. His mental qualities, his at-  
tainments, his spirit of devotion, and his growth in grace, to-  
gether with the ease with which he would have acquired the  
language all seemed to fit him eminently for the missionary  
work. We had been fondly looking forward to the time when  
he would come out here, and perhaps ultimately take my place ;  
and the people of Aintab who remember him, were hoping to  
hear him preach in this church. In the paucity of missionaries,  
his death seems to be the more lamentable. It is a most costly  
sacrifice to the terrible MONSTER, SLAVERY."  
 
Thus we might go on and fill a volume with facts like these.  
But these must suffice as specimens.  
 
These letters illustrate the motives and the spirit with which  
these men, in common with so many others from Amherst, and  
elsewhere, entered the service. They went to the war as a  
Christian duty and in the spirit of missionaries. Patriotism,  
exhibited in the military service and at the polls, was a part,  
though by no means the whole, of their religion.  
 
The names of all wider-graduates who lost their lives in the  
service, were, by vote of the Trustees, enrolled among the grad-  
uates of their respective classes. Special favor and indulgence  
have been extended freely, when asked, to all under-graduates  
who have served in the army, and returned to College.  
 
The Alumni, at their annual meetings, have discussed, plan-  
ned, passed resolutions, appointed committees, and devised at  
different times various ways and means, for commemorating the  
services of their fellow-alumni who lost their lives in the war;  
but they have carried nothing into full and successful execution.  
A monument on the grounds, a sculptured group within doors,  
a memorial hall, a lecture-room and professorship of history all  
 
these have been contemplated and some of them have been at-  
38  
 
tempted ; but the only vestige of anything accomplished is the  
two or three models in clay which were offered by as many  
and the liberality of his friend, the late George Howe, Esq., of  
Boston, the College rejoices in a monument more pleasing and ap-  
propriate, perhaps, than any of these would have been, and such  
as exists nowhere else to commemorate the fallen heroes of the  
war, viz., a memorial chime of bells placed in the tower of the Col-  
lege Church, which began to give forth their music at the Semi-  
Centennial Celebration, and which, in all coming time, while they  
fitly introduce the services of the Sabbath and accompany the  
exercises of our literary festivals, and grace all occasions of spe-  
cial interest, will always be associated with the heroic lives and  
martyr-like deaths of our brave soldiers and, by perpetuating  
their memories, stimulate future generations of students to fol-  
low their example. Among the fallen whose memory will thus  
be perpetuated is a son of the liberal donor, SIDNEY WALKER  
HOWE, of the Class of '59, who was killed in the battle of Wil-  
liamsburg, May 5, 1862, only a few months after he entered the  
service. Beneath the nine bells which compose the memorial  
chime, there is in the church tower a beautiful chamber set apart  
as a memorial room ; a marble tablet in the wall is to be inscribed  
with the names of the fallen ; a tiled floor with appropriate mot-  
toes laid in it, and stained windows with special designs will  
commemorate the principles and the events of the war ; the gun  
captured in the battle of Newburn, and bearing the names of  
those who fell in that battle, with other monuments and relics  
of the war, will be placed there. Thus through the eye and the  
ear coming generations will be reminded of the virtues and sac-  
rifices of our brethren who lost their lives in the War of the  
Great Rebellion. And so long as a single classmate or College  
mate shall survive, we will enshrine them in the memory of our  
hearts. And often as we meet at our annual reunions and call  
the rolls of our respective classes, when their names are called,  
their surviving classmates will respond for them ; " dead on the  
field of battle " " died for their father-land."  
 
