CHAPTER XVII.  
 
PRESIDENCY OF DR. HITCHCOCK.  
 
THE presidency of Dr. Hitchcock opened with auspicious  
omens. The donation of Hon. David Sears, made the previous  
year (1844), was now just beginning to manifest its benignant  
influence, and being the first large gift by an individual donor  
for the purpose of an endowment, gave promise of other dona-  
tions for like purposes. On the very day of the new President's  
inauguration, Hon. Samuel Williston of Easthampton, by a do-  
nation of twenty thousand dollars, founded the Williston Pro-  
fessorship of Rhetoric and Oratory. The plan for preventing  
any further increase of the debt which was formed before the  
retirement of President Humphrey, but was conditioned on the  
election of Dr. Hitchcock to the presidency, having received  
the sanction of the Trustees and the written assent and co-op-  
eration of all the Professors, went into effect at the commence-  
ment of the new administration. According to this plan, the  
income of the College, administered and appropriated by the  
permanent officers themselves with all the wisdom and economy  
of which they were masters, after deducting all the necessary  
current expenses, was divided among them as their salary and  
means of support. This, while it ensured economy and inspired  
courage at home, enlisted sympathy and restored confidence  
abroad ; and a series of measures followed which, during the  
less than ten years of Dr. Hitchcock's presidency, extinguished  
the debt, added an Astronomical Observatory, a Library and  
two Cabinets of Natural History to the public buildings, secured  
the permanent endowment of four professorships, together with  
 
These remarkable results, however, were not to be reached  
at once, nor without a previous season of trial and struggle, of  
disappointment and discouragement. The immediate increase  
of numbers which was anticipated from a change of administra-  
tion and in the hope of which Dr. Humphrey was rather pressed  
to retire one term earlier than was agreeable to himself, was not  
realized. On the contrary, the year 1845-6, which was the first  
collegiate year of the new presidency, opened with the same  
number of Freshmen as the previous year, and with an aggre-  
gate of one hundred and eighteen students instead of one hun-  
dred and twenty-one. In 1846-7, the aggregate was only one  
hundred and twenty, and there was an increase of only one in  
the Freshman class. Meanwhile there was no further addition  
to the funds, and the President was receiving for his salary at  
the rate of five hundred and fifty dollars, and each Professor at  
the rate of four hundred and forty dollars a year. One at least  
of the Trustees (one of the wisest and most honored, though  
not the most hopeful and courageous) was still doubtful whether  
it would not be wiser to turn the College into an Academy (for  
a good Academy was better than a poor College); and what was  
still more discouraging and even alarming, some of the most in-  
fluential students were so doubtful of the perpetuity of the In-  
stitution that nothing but the personal solicitation of the Presi-  
dent induced them to stay and graduate. No wonder, if under  
such circumstances, the President and Professors were some-  
times desponding, and the very lights sometimes seemed to burn  
blue at our Faculty meetings !  
 
It was during this period of discouragement and depression  
that the three Literary Societies were dissolved, and two new  
ones organized in their stead. While there were from two  
hundred to two hundred and fifty students in College, and  
while there was a lively interest felt in the Literary Societies,  
three Societies could be well sustained. But the Literary So-  
cieties had long been altogether secondary in interest to the  
" Greek Letter Fraternities," which had in fact drawn their  
very life-blood out of them. And now when the number of  
students had fallen off one-half, the alternative seemed to be a  
 
There was also doubtless, a conviction, of long standing and  
widely prevalent among the students, that two Societies in Col-  
lege, like two parties in the State, were the natural order, and  
the current of Society feeling and interest would flow smoothly  
in Amherst, only when as in most other Colleges, there were but  
two Literary Societies. The question of having two Societies  
instead of three, began to be discussed in the Societies as early  
as the spring of 1843, but the majority were then decidedly  
against the change. In April, 1846, the sentiment had so far  
changed with changing circumstances, that committees were ap-  
pointed by all the Societies, to consider the expediency of a re-  
organization, and the best method of consummating it. The  
Alexandrian and Athenian Societies were in favor of the plan  
and took immediate measures for carrying it into execution. It  
was not till June that the Social Union, and then perhaps under  
the pressure of circumstances that seemed to render it neces-  
sary, voted to come into the arrangement. After paying their  
debts by a sale of furniture and books, the Societies brought  
the remainder of their property into a common stock, " each  
contributing an amount equal to that of the poorest Society,"  
and early in July they were dissolved. The common stock of  
books and other property, was then divided into two equal  
portions. The students of the College were also divided, by  
an impartial allotment, into two equal bodies which were or-  
ganized into two new Societies. For several years the two  
new organizations bore the names of Academic and Eclectic.  
But in the spring of 1853, for the convenience of associated  
action in the choice of the annual orator, in occasional pub-  
lic debates and some other matters of common interest, they  
united in a third organization comprising the members of  
both, which they called the Social Union; and then the two  
Societies resumed the names Alexandrian and Athenian, by  
or the Faculty for or against these changes in the Societies. I  
do not think the question was referred to either of these bodies  
for advice or sanction. Doubtless, however, the members of  
 
the Faculty and more or less of the Corporation also, were  
consulted as individuals, and doubtless, they general!}' con-  
curred in the same opinion with the members of the Socie-  
ties, that under the circumstances, the organization was ex-  
pedient and necessary. And, even now, with the maximum  
number of two hundred and fifty students again, probably  
there is not an officer or student in the College who would vote  
for a return to the old system of three instead of two Literary  
Societies.  
 
The breaking up of those old associations which are among  
the most cherished and sacred memories of the older Alumni,  
is a great trial to them, and thus a serious loss and misfortune  
to the College. But they would have been scarcely less mor-  
tified and afflicted if they had come back here to find the  
old Alexandrian, Athenian or Social Union existing indeed in  
name, and in uninterrupted succession, but no longer the same  
Society which stirred their blood and commanded their sac-  
rifices. A radical change has come over the old Literary Socie-  
ties in all the Colleges, leaving them little else than a name.  
Revolution or extinction seemed to be the alternative before  
the Literary Societies of Amherst at this critical period in their  
history.  
in January, 1846, Dr. Hitchcock improved the opportunity to  
call on Mr. Sears, in the hope of inducing him to erect a build-  
ing for scientific purposes, which was greatly needed. But he  
met with so little encouragement, that he told Hon. Josiah B.  
Woods of Enfield, with whom he fell in on his return, that he  
had made up his mind to two things : 1, To go back to Amherst  
and labor on fqr the College, as long as he could keep soul and  
body together ; and 2, Never to ask anybody for another dollar !  
Mr. Woods told him that he was quite too much disheartened, arid  
that he thought he could raise the whole or a part of the money  
needed for the erection of such a building. Thus did hope and  
relief spring from the very bosom of despair ; for this was the  
 
tory. And the scientific reputation of Dr. Hitchcock, together  
with his self-sacrificing labors, and the self-denial of his col-  
leagues, was the very fulcrum and standing-place (the nov ar<a of  
Archimedes) by means of which Mr. Woods raised , the money.  
He went to Hon. Abbott Lawrence, and other men of like char-  
acter and standing in Boston and Lowell, and told them it was  
a shame for such a man as Dr. Hitchcock who stood at the very  
head of American savants, to toil and starve in Amherst. They  
were at first inclined to doubt whether Mr. Woods had not over-  
rated Dr. Hitchcock's rank and reputation among men of sci-  
ence. But he quoted the authority of Mr. Lyell, whom he had  
heard say that the Doctor knew more of geology and could tell  
it better than any other man he had met on this side of the At-  
lantic. " If you still doubt it, however," said Mr. Woods, " I  
will bring him down here, and you shall see for yourselves." It  
was with great difficulty that Dr. Hitchcock was induced to  
show himself under such circumstances. But he went down ;  
these gentlemen saw him, and were charmed alike by his  
wisdom and his modesty. Hon. Abbott Lawrence subscribed  
one thousand dollars ; the balance of the money was soon  
forthcoming; and by the removal of prejudice and the en-  
lightening of the public mind in influential circles in and  
around Boston, the way was prepared for obtaining a grant  
from the Legislature.  
 
Meanwhile, however, the President in his despondency and  
almost despair had discovered another and still richer mine. He  
gives the following account of it himself in his Valedictory Ad-  
dress : " Our experiment had stopped the downward course  
of the College and turned to some extent the prejudices of the  
public into sympathy for us. Still we could make no improve-  
ments; our debts pressed heavily upon us ; we found it difficult  
to eke out our deficient salaries ; and though our numbers slowly  
increased, the College seemed to my dejected spirits to be sink-  
ing deeper and deeper into the mire, and I became at length en-  
tirely satisfied that Providence did not at least intend to make  
use of my instrumentality to bring it relief. Oh, how little did  
I suspect how near that relief was, and how simply and easily  
 
change came, it seemed to me as obviously his work as if I had  
seen the sun and moon stand still or the dead start out of their  
graves; and it appeared as absurd for me to boast of my agency  
in the work as for the wires of the telegraph to feel proud be-  
cause electricity was conveying great thoughts through them.  
placed, I came to the conclusion that I must resign my place.  
Yet I felt apprehension that in the condition of our funds no  
one worthy the place would feel justified in assuming it. I  
therefore determined to make an effort to get a professorship  
endowed. And where was it more natural for me to look than  
to one who only a short time before had cheered us by the en-  
dowment of a professorship.  
 
" It had become so common a remark among the officers of  
Amherst College, that if any respectable friend should give us  
fifty thousand dollars, we should attach his name to it, that I  
felt sure it would be done ; and I recollected, too, the last words  
of Prof. Fiske, when he left us : ' Amherst College will be re-  
lieved ; Mr. Williston, I think, will give it fifty thousand dol-  
lars, and you will put his name upon it.' I felt justified, there-  
fore, in saying to him, that if his circumstances would allow  
him to come to our aid in this exigency by founding another  
professorship, I did not doubt this result was to follow. He  
gave me to understand, that in his will a professorship was al-  
ready endowed, and that he would make it available at once, if  
greatly needed. Nay, he offered to endow the half of another  
professorship provided some one else would add the other half.  
But as to attaching his name to the College, he felt unwilling  
that I should attempt to fulfill that promise, certainly during  
his life.  
 
" The half professorship thus offered, was soon made a whole  
one by Samuel A. Hitchcock, Esq., of Brimfield. And, oh!  
what a load did these benefactions take from my mind ! For  
several years, each returning Commencement had seemed to  
 
arrested. But now, with the addition of thirty thousand dol-  
lars to our funds, I began to hope that we might be saved.  
Legislature of Massachusetts was in session. We had often ap-  
pealed to them unsuccessfully for help ; and I feared, that when  
the generous benefactions of individuals should be made public,  
we should seek in vain in that quarter for the aid which should  
in justice be given us. I therefore requested permission of the  
Trustees, by letter, to make one more application to the Gov-  
ernment. They allowed me to do it, and the result was a  
donation from the State of twenty-five thousand dollars. The  
passage of the resolve met with less opposition than on former  
occasions. Perhaps the following incident, communicated to  
me by a member of the Legislature, may appear to the Chris-  
tian to be connected with this fact.  
 
" The bill for aiding Ainherst College came up on Saturday,  
and met with strong and able opposition, so that its friends  
trembled for its fate. On Saturday evening, a few members of  
the Legislature were in the habit of meeting for prayer. That  
evening the bill for aiding the College, formed the burden of  
conversation and of supplication, and each one agreed to make  
it the subject of private prayer on the Sabbath. Monday came,  
the bill was read ; but to the amazement of these praj- ing men,  
opposition had almost disappeared, and with a few remarks it  
was passed. How could they, how can we, avoid the convic-  
tion that prayer was the grand agency that smoothed the  
troubled waters, and gave the College the victory, after so many  
years of bitter opposition and defeat ! " It is hardly necessary  
to add, what Dr. Hitchcock believed as fully and insisted on as  
strenuously as any of us, that prayer, in this case, was accom-  
panied by exertion, and faith by works ; and " by works faith  
was made perfect." In proof of this, we have only to notice  
 
bers of tlie Legislature. Hon. William B. Calhoun was Presi-  
dent of the Senate. Among the Senators, most of whom were  
friendly, it is not invidious to name Jonathan C. Perkins, an  
alumnus, and Joseph A very, one of the founders and Trustees  
of Mount Holyoke Seminary, as especial friends. In running  
the eye over a list of the members of the House of Rep-  
resentatives, we notice the names of Henry Edwards of Bos-  
ton, Otis P. Lord of Salem, Alexander H. Bullock of Wor-  
cester, John Leland of Amherst, John Clary of Conway, Henry  
Morris of Springfield, and Ensign H. Kellogg of Pittsfield.  
Mr. Woods, who watched the bill pretty closely, says that  
to no one in the Senate was the College more indebted than to  
Hon. C. B. Rising, one of the Senators from Hampshire County,  
who, when it was proposed unceremoniously to reject the  
eral and unique, to the Sears Foundation of Literature and  
Benevolence. By what considerations he was influenced, may  
be seen from his letter, which was read at the dedication of  
the Woods Cabinet and the celebration which was connected  
with it : " While the benefactors of the College are thus hon-  
ored," says he, "the Faculty of the College should come in for  
their share of gratitude. I have been a silent, but not inatten-  
tive observer of them. I have been informed of their devotion  
to their literary labors, of their self-denials, of their volun-  
tary surrender of a part of their moderate salaries, reserv-  
ing only enough for a bare subsistence, to relieve the College  
in its necessity. Such disinterested zeal stands out brightly,  
and merits an honorable record."  
 
While money was thus flowing in from individual donors and  
from the Treasury of the State, Prof. Adams presented to  
the College his great Zoological collection, and Prof. Shepard  
offered to deposit his splendid cabinet as soon as a fire-proof  
building could be erected suitable to receive it.  
 
" See now," says Dr. Hitchcock as he reviews this period in  
 
in upon it in endowments and buildings in a little more thaii two  
years, as follows:  
sion of specimens, either presented or on deposit, whose value is  
poorly expressed in money. If only half their present value  
we must add from thirty-five to forty thousand dollars to the  
enable us to go on with economy from year to year and with  
increased means of instruction. The incubus that had so long  
rested upon us, was removed ; the cord that had well-nigh  
throttled us, was cut asunder, and the depletion of our life-  
blood was arrested. Those only who have passed through such  
a season of discouragement and weakness, can realize with  
1846 and the first part of 1847, were not made public till after  
a special meeting of the Trustees, which took place July 6,  
1847. This was the most delightful Trustee meeting I had  
ever attended. Those venerable men, Drs. Fiske, Packard,  
Vaill, Ely, Ide, William B. Calhoun, and John Tappan, George  
Grennell, Alfred Foster, Samuel Williston, Linus Child, David  
Mack, Ebenezer Alden and Henry Edwards, whom Dr. Hum-  
phrey and myself had so often met with a discouraging story  
of debt and an empty treasury, were now for the first time to  
be told of God's wonderful goodness in turning our captivity  
and answering their long-continued and earnest prayers. They  
were to have a little respite before they died, from the incessant  
 
demands upon their beneficence and labors with which they had  
21  
 
ever been met. It was a matter of high gratification to see how  
happy they were in their subsequent visits to Amherst, to see,  
appropriation of the newly received grants and donations, and  
the naming of the new buildings and professorships. The first  
appropriation was for the payment of the debt, then amounting  
to twelve thousand four hundred and sixty -five dollars, for this  
was the sore and heavy burden, and Mr. Sears had wisely made  
it a condition of his donations that the College must pay its  
debts before it could receive the full benefit of his foundation.  
The debt was paid partly from the funds of the College and  
partly from the grant of the State. The remainder of the  
twenty-five thousand dollars granted by the State, was appro-  
priated to the endowment of the Massachusetts Professorship of  
Chemistry and Natural History. The term bills were reduced  
from forty-eight to forty -two dollars a year, and it was voted to  
remit the full amount of the regular term bills to indigent stu-  
dents preparing for the Christian ministry. The new Cabinet  
received the name of Hon. Josiah B. Woods, and ths Observa-  
tory that of Hon. Abbott Lawrence. The Professorship of Nat-  
ural Theology and Geology, endowed by Hon. Samuel Williston  
and Samuel A. Hitchcock, Esq., was named from the latter ; the  
Professorship of Greek and Hebrew, endowed by Mr. Williston,  
was named the Graves Professorship, with a double reference  
to the maiden name of Mrs. Williston and to Col Graves, one  
of the founders ; and a new Professorship of Latin and French,  
temporarily endowed, was called the Moore Professorship, in  
honor of the first President. Arrangements were also made  
for making up in full the deficient salaries of the President  
and Professors, and the sum of twelve hundred dollars was  
the most of any success in the way of public impression. The  
placing of blinds upon the windows of the dormitory buildings  
was a stroke of policy for impression on the students, equal to  
 
Napoleon's gilding the dome of the Invalides for dazzling the  
eyes of the Parisians, although under very different circumstan-  
ces. Not less suited to please students was his policy of making  
to them the first formal and public announcement of all these  
donations and the action of the Trustees. The scene is thus  
described in the Reminiscences : " The meeting closed in the  
afternoon, and as the students were yet ignorant of the whole  
matter of which I knew they felt a deep interest, I took the op-  
portunity at evening prayers to read the votes, and I shall never  
forget the scene that followed. At first they did not seem to  
comprehend the matter, and they gave no demonstration of their  
feelings especially as two of the Trustees were present. But as  
the successive announcements came out, they could not restrain  
their feelings and began to clap, and by the time the last vote  
was read, the clapping was tremendous, and when they were  
dismissed and had reached the outer door of the Chapel, they  
stopped and the cheering was long and loud."  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees in August, 1847, they  
appointed " a committee to consider in what manner we should  
testify our gratitude to God and our benefactors, in view of re-  
cent favors to the College." They reported, that " at such time  
as the President and Professors shall regard as suitable, a public  
meeting be held in Amherst, with an invitation to the friends  
and benefactors of the College to be present, and that Hon.  
William B. Calhoun be requested to deliver an address on the  
occasion." The meeting was deferred till June 28, 1848, in or-  
der to connect with it the dedication of the new Cabinet and  
Observatory, which would not be finished and filled with speci-  
mens at an earlier date. The occasion was one of deep interest.  
The President's address of welcome was in the same strain of  
wonder and gratitude to God and our benefactors which we  
have seen in the foregoing pages. Mr. Calhoun in his address  
of commemoration and dedication said : " The waning fortunes  
of this Institution have for years brought to our hearts gloom,  
despondency, almost despair. Heaven again beams upon us  
with blessings. To heaven let us not cease to offer the incense  
of thanksgiving. We render our thankfulness and gratitude  
 
through which we have passed. We receive the College into  
the fellowship of new and animated hopes. The massive struct-  
ures upon which are inscribed the names of the generous do-  
nors, rising up in the midst of this landscape, these hills and  
valleys of unsurpassed grandeur and beauty, are now dedicated  
to the cause of science and truth. Long, ever may they stand  
thus dedicated. Here may science remain tributary to virtue,  
freedom, religion. Here may there be inscribed on all these  
walls and in every heart, Christo et Ecclesiae"  
 
In response to the call and remarks of President Hitchcock,  
brief addresses were made by Gov. Armstrong, Mr. Woods, Mr.  
Williston, Prof. Silliman, Prof. Shepard, Prof. Redfield, and  
President Wheeler, and letters were read from ex-President  
Humphrey, Prof. B. B. Edwards, Mr. Sears, Mr. Lawrence, Mr.  
Gerard Hallock and others. It was a day of great rejoicing, and  
in the name of all who participated in this festival of joy and  
gratitude, in the name especially of the generous donors whose  
benefactions were thus celebrated, and whose names are in-  
scribed upon those walls and tablets, the writer of this History  
here enters his public protest against any hasty or needless re-  
moval of these buildings. Dedicated to science and religion,  
and inscribed with the names of the generous donors, we can  
remarked: "We should be very faithless and ungrateful to  
doubt that the same Providence which has done so much for us  
the past year, will send us a fitting telescope if it is best for us to  
have one, and send it, too, just at the right time." In his Vale-  
dictory Address, he was able to say: " This prediction, through  
the liberality of Hon. Rufus Bullock, has been fulfilled ; and a  
noble telescope has just been placed in yonder dome which,  
through the great skill and indefatigable industry of Alvan  
Clark, Esq., who has constructed it, is one of the finest instru-  
ments of its size that ever graced an observatory. In the hands  
of Mr. Clark, it has already introduced to the astronomic world  
two new double stars never before recognized one of which is  
 
After the first three years of his administration, having already-  
succeeded beyond his most sanguine hopes in relieving the Col-  
lege from debt, and established it on a solid pecuniary founda-  
tion, while at the same time he saw it increasing in numbers,  
and enjoying a literary and religious prosperity corresponding  
with its financial condition, President Hitchcock might well have  
said, " Now lettest Thou thy servant depart in peace." He now  
began to press upon the Trustees a wish to retire from the pres-  
idency. But instead of listening to his suggestion, they pressed  
him to recuperate his health and spirits by a tour in Europe, and  
in the spring of 1850, he and Mrs. Hitchcock reluctantly set out  
on their journey. He traveled through Great Britain, France,  
Belgium, Switzerland, and a portion of Germany ; explored the  
Geology of these countries, examined the Agricultural Schools,  
in the discharge of a commission unexpectedly received from  
the government of Massachusetts ; visited and studied the scien-  
tific collections, the galleries and museums ; observed with equal  
interest the natural features, and the moral and religious aspects  
of the countries ; attended the meeting of the British Associa-  
tion for the advancement of science at Edinburg, and the Peace  
Congress at Frankfort-on-the-Main, and returned home " hav-  
ing been absent one hundred and fifty-eight days, and traveled  
ten thousand six hundred and forty-seven miles," (these details  
are characteristic,) and having expended for himself and wife  
less than two hundred dollars over and above what he received  
from the Government and from individuals with whom he trav-  
eled or fell in, and who insisted on defraying portions of his  
expenses. On reaching Amherst, he was received at the en-  
trance of the town by the students who gave him an enthusi-  
was read at the dedication of the Cabinet, he says : " When  
your new building for the Library is completed fire-proof a  
fine specimen of architecture, and filled with twenty thousand  
new books, as I presume it will be, I will promise, without fail,  
to be present. Please inform me of the time of its dedication."  
It was more than two years after this was written, before even  
 
the first step was taken towards raising money for a Library  
building. Yet even then the building already existed in the  
faith and hope of Prof. Edwards, and his love and zeal and  
efforts were among the chief means of its actual existence a few  
years later in a material, form and style of architecture corre-  
sponding to his sanguine anticipations.  
 
Encouraged by the Sears foundation, a portion of whose income  
was restricted to the purchase of books, by a liberal donation  
from George Merriam, Esq., of Springfield, and by an informal  
meeting of a few friends of the College in Salem, (Judges Per-  
kins and Huntington, and Richard P. Waters, Esq.,) Prof. Ed-  
wards brought the subject before the Trustees at their annual  
meeting in 1850, and they authorized an immediate effort to  
procure means for erecting a Library, and increasing the num-  
ber of books. Prof. Edwards was chairman of the committee on  
whom this duty was devolved. The work of raising the money  
was commenced by Prof. Tyler who started a subscription  
(where subscriptions in behalf of the College have most fre-  
quently taken their start) in the town of Amherst. Three thou-  
sand dollars were raised on the spot before any effort was made  
elsewhere. Another thousand was raised in the vicinity, chiefly  
in the neighboring churches. Mr. Merriam had already given  
his pledge of fifteen hundred dollars. Mr. Williston, who in  
this as in all the other efforts in behalf of the College, was the  
largest benefactor, stood ready with a donation of three thou-  
sand dollars. But the larger and more difficult part of the work  
was done by Mr. George B. Jewett who, when he commenced  
it, was a teacher of a private school in Salem, but soon after  
was made Professor of Latin and Modern Languages. Among  
the largest subscriptions out of Amherst, were those of David  
Sears and Jonathan Phillips of Boston. When the sum of fif-  
teen thousand dollars was procured, ten thousand was devoted  
to the building, and the remainder to the purchase of books.  
The building was planned by the same architect as the Cabinet  
and Observatory, (Mr. Sykes.) It was begun in 1852, and fin-  
ished in 1853. Prof. Edwards, alas, did not live to see it com-  
pleted. His friend, Prof. Park, had the melancholy satisfaction  
 
building introduced a new era in the architecture on the College  
hill. Hitherto brick had been the sole material. The Library,  
according to the suggestion of Prof. Edwards, was of stone, thus  
inaugurating what might be called the age of granite. And it  
was scarcely less a new epoch in regard to the new books that  
11, 1852, they established a Scientific Department, designed to  
meet the wants of graduates who wish to pursue particular  
branches of science and literature beyond the regular four  
years' course, and of other young men who desire to study  
some subjects without joining the regular classes. This depart-  
ment grew naturally out of the rich and extensive Cabinets and  
the valuable Laboratory which the College possessed, together  
with the rare cluster of Scientific Professors gathered here under  
the auspices and guidance of a Scientific President. As adopted  
by the corporation and published in the Catalogue for 1852-3,  
the department comprised nine branches which were to be taught  
chiefly by the regular Professors of the ordinary College course,  
(although two or three other gentlemen resident in the town  
were called in to supplement deficiencies,) as follows : 1, Geol-  
ogy by the President ; 2, Mathematics, Natural Philosophy and  
Engineering by Prof. Snell ; 3, Chemistry by Prof. Clark; 4,  
Agriculture by Rev. J. A. Nash; 5, Mineralogy by Prof. Shep-  
ard ; 6, Zoology by Prof. Adams ; 7, Botany, without any  
special Professor ; 8, Psychology and History of Philosophy by  
Prof. Haven ; 9, Philology by Professors Tyler and Jewett, and  
English Literature by Prof. Warner. The Department was to  
be entirely independent of the regular College course, but stu-  
dents were to be allowed to attend any of the regular courses  
of lectures.  
 
The plan went into operation in January, 1853. In 1853-4,  
there were twelve scientific students ; in 1854-5, there were  
seventeen ; in 1855-6, there were none reported, and in 1857-8,  
the plan drops out of the Catalogue. In the triennial only seven  
men are recorded as having so completed the course as to re-  
 
This experiment differed from that of the " Parallel Course "  
twenty "years previous, in that the Scientific Department was  
entirely independent of the regular College course instead of  
being parallel and incorporated with it, and not professing to be  
an equivalent for it, did not confer the same academic degree.  
But it came to nearly the same issue, and that partly, if not  
chiefly, for the same reasons. The work of instruction was de-  
volved almost entirely on the Professors in the regular course  
who already had as many duties and responsibilities on their  
hands as they could faithfully and successfully discharge. More  
money and more men were requisite to make it a success, and  
even with these the older Institutions in or near the large cities  
have the advantage over Amherst in regard to purely scientific,  
as also in regard to professional education. The practical lesson  
of these experiments seems to be, let Amherst adhere to her  
original and proper work, the educational work of a New Eng-  
land Christian College.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees in August, 1853,  
President Hitchcock offered to make a donation to the College  
of his collection of fossil foot-marks, valued by Prof. Shepard  
at thirty-five hundred dollars, on condition that the friends of  
the College would raise five or six hundred dollars for the in-  
crease of the collection, and the Trustees would make the neces-  
sary arrangements for the permanent exhibition of it in the Geo-  
logical Cabinet. Before the offer was made, the first condition  
had already been met through the agency of Dr. Hitchcock him-  
self. Of course the Trustees were not slow to comply with the  
second condition, and thus the Doctor's private Ichnological Cab-  
inet became the property of the College, just as his Mineralogical  
and Geological Cabinets had been given to the College, fifteen  
years previous on very similar conditions. These Cabinets are  
now of inestimable value, especially the Ichnological, which is,  
perhaps, the choicest and richest of the kind in the world, and so,  
besides attracting thousands of ordinary visitors every year, has  
made Amherst a kind of Mecca to geologists and savants of all  
nations. It would have been easy, and perhaps perfectly right  
for Dr. Hitchcock to have kept it in his own hands, increasing  
teristic of him rather to give it to the College without imposing  
any other conditions, except such as would make it more valua-  
ble and useful.  
 
At the same time Mr. Edward Hitchcock, Jr., presented to  
the College his collection of Indian relics, the fruit of half a  
dozen years' industry, and then consisting of seven hundred and  
twenty-one specimens, stipulating only that the collection should  
be placed in suitable cases, and should never be merged with any  
Dr. Vaill, Dr. Alden and Mr. Edwards were appointed a com-  
mittee to inquire into the state and condition of the College in  
pursuance of the recommendations of the President at the close  
of his annual report. At a special meeting of the Board at Am-  
herst, November 21, 1853, that committee, after much prelimi-  
nary investigation and consultation with the Professors, the  
Treasurer, and others on the ground, made an extended written  
report, which was unanimously adopted by the Trustees, and  
entered on their records. After expressing their conviction re-  
sulting from careful investigation, that the College is in a pros-  
perous and progressive state, and that its patrons and guardians  
have just cause of congratulation and encouragement, they pro-  
ceed to suggest a few particulars in which there is room for im-  
provement. Among these suggestions, carefully guarded and  
kindly expressed, but deemed very desirable, are a more vigilant  
and effective supervision by the Faculty of the students at their  
rooms, and on the grounds, and without abating in the least the  
paternal element in the government, a more rigid enforcement  
of the College laws, and more promptness in removing those  
who can not be governed by moral suasion. " If the present ad-  
ministration of the College can be improved in any particular,"  
says the committee, " it is believed to be in this." After some  
half a dozen other recommendations, among which are the in-  
crease of the salaries of the Professors to one thousand dol-  
 
ors, with a special appropriation for illustrating and adorning  
the walls of the Greek room, the first step in a process which  
has resulted in making the classical recitation-rooms among the  
most attractive rooms in the College the committee conclude  
their report as follows : " The rank which Amherst College now  
holds among the great educational agencies of our land, im-  
poses on the Board of Trustees, responsibilities which they can  
neither relinquish, nor slightly discharge, without compromising  
interests the most solemn and momentous ; and so far as these  
responsibilities have in time past been transferred to the Faculty  
as was very properly done to some extent during a period of  
depression, when, to save it from sinking, they generously con-  
sented to remain at their post, and to take the College into their  
hands for the scanty compensation which its income would af-  
ford the committee think the time has now come for the Trus-  
tees to resume the entire responsibility of its management, and  
thus relieve the Faculty of all burdens not specifically devolved  
on them by the laws of the College."  
 
Whether this meeting of the Trustees hastened at all the res-  
ignation of the President is not known. Probably it did not,  
although the report of the Committee which the Trustees  
adopted as their own, reflected somewhat on the administration  
in a characteristic and vital point. But it doubtless led to the  
resignation of Prof. Warner who, "not so much under the pres-  
sure of experience as under the experience of a pressure," re-  
signed his office at this time. In accepting his resignation, the  
Trustees " tendered him the assurance of their sincere respect  
in view of the uniform courtesy which has marked his inter-  
course with them during the whole period of his connection  
with the College and the deep interest he has uniformly taken  
in its welfare." At the same meeting, they elected Rev. Thomas  
P. Field, then of Troy, N. Y., to fill the vacancy.  
 
Three days after this meeting of the corporation, President  
Hitchcock addressed a letter " to the Hon. Nathan Appleton  
and other executors of the will of the late Hon. Samuel Apple-  
ton," rehearsing the donation and growth of the zoological col-  
 
by the testimonies of Dr. Gould and Prof. Agassiz, explaining  
the inconvenience, the utter inadequacy and also the insecurity  
of the rooms in which these collections were now deposited,  
and modestly inquiring whether the erection of a suitable build-  
ing to receive and protect them all, would not come within the  
scope of the liberal bequest of two hundred thousand dollars  
which Mr. Appleton left for the purposes of literature, science  
and benevolence. For an entire year Dr. Hitchcock received  
foreign tour, had relapsed to such a degree that he felt he could  
no longer endure the burden of the presidency, and must insist  
on being relieved. With this view, he summoned a special  
meeting of the Trustees in Boston on the llth of July, 1854,  
and there resigned his office, into their hands, assigning as his  
only reason " the inadequacy of his health to sustain the labors,  
especially those pertaining to the government of the Institution."  
It was voted " that the resignation of President Hitchcock be  
accepted, to take effect when a successor can be appointed,  
and that his services be retained in the Professorship of Natu-  
ral Theology and Geology." At the annual meeting of the  
Board, August 7, 1854, Rev. William A. Stearns was cl^osen  
President and Professor of Moral Philosophy and Christian  
Theology. On Tuesday evening, November- 21, 1854, Dr.  
Stearns was installed Pastor of the College Church by an Ec-  
clesiastical Council of which Rev. Dr. Vaill was the Moderator  
and Rev. Dr. Blagden, Scribe. The sermon was preached by  
Rev. Dr. Leavitt of Providence. Dr. Hitchcock gave the charge  
to the Pastor. The Right Hand of Fellowship was presented  
by Rev. Mr. Paine of Holden, and an address made to the Col-  
lege by Rev. Dr. J. S. Clark of Boston. On Wednesday, No-  
vember 22, the Inaugural services were held in the village  
church. After singing by the College Choir and prayer by Rev.  
Dr. Clark, an historical address was delivered by the retiring  
President, including the ceremony of giving the College seal,  
charter, etc., as an act of induction to his successor, and closing  
with the announcement of a donation of ten thousand dol-  
 
lars to the College from the Trustees of the late Samuel Apple-  
ton, for the erection of a Cabinet of Natural History. Dr.  
Hitchcock had relinquished all hope of such a donation. He  
had written his farewell address in this state of mind. After  
describing the rich zoological collections of Prof. Adams with  
the testimonies of Prof. Agassiz and Dr. Gould to their uneqnaled  
scientific value, he had written : " Yet this fine collection is  
spread into three apartments and is imminently exposed to fire.  
To secure a new building to receive it, with the still more ex-  
posed collection of fossil foot-marks, has long been with me an  
object of strong desire and effort ; and it is among the deepest of  
delivered it, " thus had I written only a few days ago, and  
thus had I expected to leave this subject, to-day. But a kind  
Providence has ordered otherwise. Last evening a letter was  
received, announcing the gratifying intelligence that the Trus-  
tees under the will of the late Hon. Samuel Appleton of Boston,  
had appropriated, only ten days ago, ten thousand dollars of the  
sum left by him for scientific and benevolent purposes to the  
erection of another cabinet the Appleton Zoological Cabinet by  
the side of the Woods Cabinet on yonder hill." Thus he, who  
in his experiments in the Chemical Laboratory, was always  
expecting to fail, but never did fail, was now successful beyond  
his most sanguine expectations, for as usual he had asked for  
the smallest sum that could possibly answer the purpose, and  
he received nearly twice as much as he asked ; and the close of  
his administration was marked, like its beginning, by donations  
appropriate remarks from Col. A. H. Bullock of Worcester, com-  
municating the doings of the Trustees in reference to the afore-  
said donation. Mr. Bullock's remarks on the reception of this  
gift were received with universal and hearty applause. Two or  
three degrees were conferred by the retiring President, among  
others one on Alvan Clark, Esq., of Cambridge, maker of the  
 
magnificent telescope recently presented to the College by Rufus  
Bullock, Esq., of Royalston, Mass. After a few minutes' recess,  
a Latin Oration of a congratulatory character was delivered,  
according to appointment, by Hasket Derby, a member of the  
Senior class. The closing exercise was the Inaugural Address  
by the new President." l  
 
If Dr. Humphrey was our Moses, the giver of our laws and  
institutions, Dr. Hitchcock was our Joshua, who led us into the  
promised land, conquered our enemies by making them friends,  
and gave us secure and permanent possession of houses that we  
did not build, vineyards and oliveyards that we planted not. It  
is not difficult to discern the distinctive features of this portion  
of our history. It was in many respects a new era, and that in  
no small measure the result of a new policy. It was the end  
forever, let us hope of living beyond our means and running in  
debt. Dr. Hitchcock had seen and suffered the effects of that  
process some of the most impressive pages in his " Reminis-  
cences " 2 are those in which he describes the Sisyphean labor  
which it imposed, and the fatal consequences to which it led ;  
and he adopted at- the outset the rule to which he rigidly ad-  
hered, and which he earnestly recommended to all public insti-  
tutions, to erect no buildings and make no improvements until  
the funds were actually obtained.  
 
It was the end of general subscriptions to meet current expen-  
ses. It was the beginning of endowments by large donations  
from individuals. 3 It was the beginning of grants by the State.  
It was the age of growth and expansion in cabinets, collections,  
and materials for the illustration of the physical sciences. Our  
Archaeological Museums also owe their origin to this adminis-  
tration. At the same time, and this fact deserves the attention  
of those who may have supposed that Dr. Hitchcock was a one-  
sided President, and gave the Institution growth and impulse  
only in one direction it was the period in which the Library  
 
1 See Discourses and Addresses at the Installation and Inauguration of the Rev.  
William A. Stearns, D. D., as President of Amherst College, and Pastor of the  
College Church.  
 
2 See pp. 122-4; 138-42.  
 
3 Mr. Sears' first donation was made before the close of Dr. Humphrey's presi-  
dency. But it came unsought, and was only such an exception as proves the rule.  
 
building was erected, and new books were placed on the shelves  
of such a kind, and to such an extent as to make it almost a new  
Library.  
 
Last, not least, it inaugurated the reign of comparative peace.  
From the commencement of Dr. Hitchcock's presidency, there  
was less of hostility abroad than there had ever been before,  
and more than for many years previous, of peace, quietness,  
contentment and satisfaction at home. . This was partly the re-  
sult of a change of times and circumstances, and partly of a  
more paternal, perhaps we might say fraternal, administration  
suited to the times. "While he was true and faithful to the  
Faculty and government under his predecessor, and bore with  
the spirit of a martyr the opprobrium and harm of measures and  
methods of discipline which he did not approve, it was no secret  
that he preferred a more conciliatory policy. During his own  
presidency, the majority of the Faculty were often inclined to a  
more rigid discipline. And the Trustees, as we have seen, were  
unanimously of the opinion, that if the administration could be  
improved in any particular, it was by greater firmness and strict-  
ness in the enforcement of the laws. Yet President Hitchcock  
continued to the last to believe in, and rely on moral suasion,  
and personal, social and Christian influence, as the sceptre of  
his power. Perhaps he had no more faith than his colleagues  
in the good sense, right disposition and honorable purpose of  
the students, nor in the goodness of human nature generally;  
for he was a firm believer in the doctrine of total depravity.  
But he certainly had less faith in the efficacy of the rod, either  
in family or College government. He could give as many rea-  
sons as Plutarch for " delay in the punishment of the wicked,"  
and not the least among these was, that therein he imitated the  
patience and forbearance of the Deity.  
 
He magnified the civilizing and refining influence of the fam-  
ily upon students. He did not believe in the dormitory sys-  
tem. 1 If he had been called to establish a new Institution, he  
would have had no dormitories. Having dormitories in Amherst  
College, he did all he could to counterbalance their evil influ-  
ence. To this end, as well as for the increase of personal ac-  
 
1 Cf. Reminiscences of Amherst College, p. 143.  
 
quaintance and influence, he introduced the custom of inviting  
the Freshmen, soon after entering College, to meet the families  
of the Faculty and others from the village, at his own house ;  
and although the Sophomores sometimes surprised and grieved  
the good man by improving the opportunity to enter their rooms  
and turn them topsy-turvy, and perhaps pile up their beds in  
his own front yard, yet he never gave up his faith in the "Fresh-  
man Levee," nor in the influence of cultivated Christian fami-  
lies in town over College students. In accordance with this  
same general idea, the Senior Levee, which under the presidency  
of Dr. Humphrey, was only a collation at the President's house  
at noon, immediately after the close of the Senior examination,  
was at once changed by Dr. Hitchcock into a social party in the  
evening.  
 
The Professors and Tutors who were associated with Dr.  
Hitchcock in the government and instruction, were, for the most  
part, one with him in aim and spirit some added much to the  
lustre of his presidency ; and were he to write the history of his  
own administration, he would ascribe a large share of its suc-  
cess to their hearty and able co-operation. Aaron Warner,  
Nathan W. Fiske, Ebenezer S. Snell, Charles U. Shepard, Wil-  
liam S. Tyler, Charles B. Adams, Henry B. Smith, Wm. A. Pea-  
body, Joseph Haven, George B. Jewett, William S. Clark, and  
Thomas P. Field, make up the entire list of the Professors, who  
at different times composed his Faculty. The list of the Tutors  
comprises Rowland Ayres, David Torrey, Lewis Green, Marshall  
Henshaw, Francis A. March, Albert Tolman, Leonard Hum-  
phrey, William Rowland, Henry L. Edwards, William C. Dick-  
inson, John M. Emerson, Samuel Fiske, George Rowland and  
John E. Sanford with Lyman Coleman, Jabez B. Lyman, In-  
structors William B. Calhoun, James L. Merrick and John A.  
Nash, nominally Lecturers or Instructors, and Lucius M. Bolt-  
wood, Librarian. The larger part of these are still living three  
of them still connected with the College the rest, for the most  
 
consequent unintentional injustice to them, which is doubtless  
more or less applicable to others, if not to all Tutors, especially  
since the introduction of the Greek Letter Societies, into the  
College, and is worthy of being put on record, as illustrating  
how differently students in College look at their instructors from  
the views which the same students will take of the same instruc-  
tors in after life. The writer of the letter is Professor, and just  
now acting President of Robert College, near Constantinople :  
in proportion. I felt sure of it myself, in regard to one Tutor,  
and was probably the means of preventing the class from giving  
him a parting present. But, when I was in Amherst the other  
day, I looked up my marks (in the College Registr} 7 -,) and I am  
certain that my suspicions were utterly unfounded. If any-  
thing, both these Tutors marked me higher than I deserved.  
light in which the same person views the same thing in and out  
of College : " Our class, all through Sophomore year, had a  
most unenviable reputation for abusing Freshmen. . . . One of  
the men engaged in one of these affairs, went to sleep the next  
day in the class, and when we went out, Prof. Jewett requested  
us not to disturb him, so he slept on until the Professor's next  
class came in ! It was a presumptive proof against him, which  
was well followed up, and he and others were sent away from  
College for a time. These difficulties brought up many ques-  
tions of College honor hard to solve. I never had a hand in  
any of these affairs, but I accidentally saw and recognized the  
men engaged in the last one mentioned. President Hitchcock  
in some way learned this fact, and called on me to reveal their  
names. I refused, and I think the class almost unanimously ap-  
proved my refusal. It was wrong. I ought, when put in this  
position, to have told what I knew, but the Faculty did not put  
it in such a light as to convince us. I am strongly inclined to  
feel that all such cases should be handed over to the law, to be  
 
to the real bearing of the case. Witnesses would not hesitate  
to testify then, when under oath."  
 
Rev. Aaron Warner was appointed Professor of Rhetoric and  
Oratory shortly before the close of Dr. Humphrey's presidency,  
and resigned his professorship shortly before President Hitch-  
cock's resignation. His professorship was, therefore, of about  
the same duration with Dr. Hitchcock's presidency, viz. : nine  
years, and for the most part synchronous with it. He had been  
an honored and useful pastor at Medford, and highly esteemed  
for his practical wisdom, good sense and Christian spirit, as  
a member of the Prudential Committee of the American Board  
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions in Boston. He had had  
some experience in a kindred department as Professor of Sacred  
Rhetoric in the Theological Seminary at Gilmanton, of which  
he was one of the founders and pillars. Coming to Amherst in  
the meridian of his life and reputation, he trained the lower  
classes thoroughly in articulation, orthoepy and the elements of  
elocution ; he criticised wisely and well the compositions of the  
upper classes ; he taught the Seniors in Rhetoric and English  
Literature faithfully and fairly but without much of the vital  
force and enthusiasm which students prize so highly in a teacher ;  
he was heard and understood rather than felt as a power in the  
pulpit, for his sermons were remarkable for brevity, variety and  
perspicuity rather than richness of thought, force of reasoning  
or felicity of diction ; in the absence of President Hitchcock in  
Europe, he presided and preached the Baccalaureate Sermon to  
the satisfaction of the College and the community ; in short, as  
a man, a gentleman and a Christian he was admired and loved  
by officers and students as he still is by all who know him ; but  
he did not quite sustain and advance his department so as to  
keep pace with the growth and progress of the College ; and he  
became a victim partly to a department which has sacrificed so  
many of its incumbents, and partly to a spasm of virtuous en-  
ergy on the part of the Trustees in one of their meetings, in  
which, as we have seen, they endeavored to make amends for  
past remissness, real or imagined, by screwing up all the Faculty  
and blowing up one of the Professors. As an Ex-Professor he  
 
generosity, and his portrait placed in the Library by some of his  
pupils soon after his resignation, will perpetuate the benignant  
before he was called to Union Theological Seminary in New York,  
where he has become so widely known as a leader in the Presby-  
terian Church, and one of the brightest ornaments of American  
Theology and Ecclesiastical History. With a simplicity and pu-  
rity of character equaled only by his learning and power, he ex-  
erted an influence as great as it was good in the Professor's chair,  
in the pulpit, in the government of the College, in the commu-  
nity and the vicinity ; and he went away leaving a friend in every  
pupil in every person with whom he was intimately associated.  
 
The other Professors, named above, who are still among the  
living, continued to hold office under President Hitchcock's suc-  
fessors and three Tutors have gone to participate with him in  
the honors and rewards of faithful service. The three Profes-  
sors all departed in advance of their honored and beloved Presi-  
dent. One of these was the ripe scholar and veteran Professor,  
whose biography has been already sketched, who, almost at the  
beginning of this presidency, went up from the city where our  
Lord was crucified to walk the streets of the New Jerusalem.  
Another who seemed born for a collector and classifier of all facts  
in Natural History, the youthful Aristotle of our Lyceum, went  
to the West Indies partly for his health, but chiefly to enlarge  
his scientific collections, and there fell a sacrifice to his zeal for  
science when he had only just commenced his career of discov-  
When science's self destroyed her favorite son !  
Yes, she too much indulged thy fond pursuit,  
She sowed the seeds, but death has reaped the fruit.  
 
A third, scholarly and refined, full of hope and promise, had  
just entered his professorship, and just begun to inspire his class  
with his own enthusiasm for the language and literature of the  
old Romans, when he was suddenly stricken down by the  
destroyer. l  
 
Of the three Tutors, Leonard Humphrey had made the mark  
of a fine scholar and a gentle Christian spirit on his pupils for  
one year, and was recruiting himself in vacation with his friends  
for the labors of a second year ; but suddenly, in the midst of  
health and activity, he fell in the street his heart had ceased  
to beat " he was not, for God took him."  
 
John M. Emerson lived to middle life, and lived to good pur-  
pose ; for he had demonstrated to the conviction of all who  
knew him, that an honest, cultivated Christian lawyer can live  
and succeed in New York ; when in the very prime of his life  
and promise, the bar of that city was robbed of so rare an orna-  
ment, and at the same time a widowed mother in Amherst  
bereft of her only son.  
 
Samuel Fisk had left his tutorship, had written his letters  
from foreign parts, all flashing with wit and genius ; and by a  
few years of able and faithful service in the ministry, had already  
rooted himself in the hearts of an affectionate people, when the  
clarion of war summoned him to the tented field, and he fell in  
the battle of Spottsylvania, one of many noble sons whom our  
mother has given to the service of the country, of liberty and  
of mankind.  
 
Of these, and such as these, was the Faculty composed that  
aided and advanced the administration of Dr. Hitchcock. But  
most of them, as we have said, still live live to adorn the Pul-  
pit, the Senate, the Professor's and the Speaker's chair and it  
remains for those who come after us, and outlive them, to give  
their character and write their history.  
 
The following letter, written by one who graduated near the  
close of Dr. Hitchcock's presidency, brings out some of the char-  
acteristic features of the then College times, and exhibits them  
from a student's point of view. We give it almost entire, as a  
sort of epilogue to this portion of our history.  
 
1 Prof. William A. Peabody.  
had passed its crisis, and had entered upon a prosperous career.  
During the time of my connection with the College, there was  
nothing of special interest that I now remember nothing extra-  
ordinary. It does not, therefore, seem to me that our honored  
historian can derive any help from any thing which I can com-  
municate, and it is only the urgency of the committee that impels  
me to write.  
 
Of the college officers, no one probably was, in our day, so  
withstanding his sometimes blunt, manner, the students had no  
warmer friend among the Faculty none more devoted to their  
good, none especially more interested in their spiritual improve-  
ment, than Prof. Tyler. No member of the Faculty was more  
popular with the class as a whole than he. There was no family  
in which we felt so much at home as in his.  
 
The Philosophical lectures of Prof. Snell were very popular.  
His experiments were almost always sure to succeed Even his  
jokes, which were well understood to be stereotyped, and to be  
handed down from class to class, were racy and enjoyable, and  
gave a relish to the lectures. During one of his exercises with  
the Class of '50 in reply to some remark of the class, he perpe-  
trated some witticism not written down in his lectures, and as if  
surprised at it, he involuntarily, and in the manner of soliloquy  
S. of our class was under examination in Zoology, he was asked,  
"What is the peculiarity of the opossum?" D. whispered to  
him, " It has a pouch." S. spoke up, very bravely, " It has a  
paunch, Sir."  
 
I was always much impressed by the intimacy of the College  
relation. There were rival interests, and clans ; yet it was one  
community, one family. Anything affecting the interests of the  
College, or the community as such, was sure to rouse every man.  
 
A village rowdy one day insulted one of the students I think he  
kicked him and although the student was one of the least pop-  
ular men in College, the whole College was in a blaze. Every  
man felt that in the person of that student, he himself had re-  
ceived a kick.  
 
This bond of sympathy was still more apparent during the revi-  
val in March, 1850. As soon as the awakening began, and the  
inquiry, " What must I do to be saved," was heard, there was  
the hush and stillness of death. For a few days, the most hard-  
ened men in College were subdued and thoughtful. The whole  
aspect of the College was changed at once, with almost the sud-  
denness of an electric flash. I do not believe that there was one  
person in the whole College who for a time was not profoundly  
moved. There was no sound of laughing or loud talking. There  
were no heavy footsteps in the halls, no noise, no tumult ; but  
the awful stillness and solemnity of those who stood face to face  
with the realities of eternity. Interest so intense can not, of  
course, be long maintained. Every one decided the question  
very quickly, and gradually College life resumed its wonted chan-  
alumnus are doubtless with his own class. We thought that  
our class that of '52 was a remarkably good one ! Very  
few classes, I apprehend, had a more genuine class spirit.  
Soon after we entered, a committee was despatched to Spring-  
field to procure class caps, as a sort of badge of the class,  
not of the outlandish kinds which are frequently seen, but  
a neat and sensible head-dress which could be worn any-  
where without attracting a crowd of small boys. The con-  
trolling influence in the class was a moral one. The class at  
least the influential majority took strong ground against rowdy-  
ism, especially that brutal and cowardly sort which consists in  
injuring the rooms or the persons and property of students, par-  
ticularly the Freshmen ; and this not only while as Freshmen,  
we were subjected to a good deal of that sort of experience, but  
especially on entering the Sophomore year, when a meeting of the  
 
the leading men of the class boldly avowed their determination to  
expose any member of the class whom they should detect in do-  
ing anything of the kind, beyond the little tricks and jokes that  
in a college community are considered harmless. It was decided  
that a little hydropathic treatment was sometimes not wholl} r  
objectionable, especially when a Freshman had an excess of  
starch. But the breaking of windows and doors, and the like,  
was declared to be unmanly, and against the honor of the class,  
sions, which we enjoyed exceedingly. One of the most memo-  
rable was to the summit of Mount Holyoke. One Monday morn-  
ing of our Senior year, a member of our class received word,  
in a clandestine way, that the young ladies of the Seminary at  
South Hadley, with their teachers were to make an excursion to  
the mountain that very day, and would not object to meeting some  
of their College " cousins." The young ladies were not informed  
of the excursion until after supper, Saturday evening, so that the  
intelligence might not reach Amherst ; but some " bird of the  
air " brought the word, a class meeting was called, the consent  
of the Faculty obtained. Nothing was sard to the Professors, of  
course, about the expected visit of the young ladies there, and in  
about an hour we were en route to Mount Holyoke, where the  
day was very pleasantly spent, and where, I believe, there was  
scarcely anything exceptionable said or done. We had the im-  
pression that the ladies enjoyed it, even better than we did !  
 
Early in the first term of our Junior year, we were, one day.  
assembled for our recitation in Greek, and as our Professor did  
not come, we remained for a little chat, when a motion was made  
and carried that a committee be appointed to collect and retain,  
till the vacation, all the razors in the class. The wearing of  
beards was not so common then as now. Another committee was  
chosen to draw up a constitution, and the class was formed into  
an anti-shaving society called Philopogonia. During the term,  
the society had a public celebration in one of the village halls, at  
which an oration and a poem were delivered, and the occasion  
 
deal of innocent fun in the College during that term, and gave  
the Juniors a good deal of eclat. All the members of the class,  
except some of the youngest, were fully bewhiskered ; but at the  
close of the term the razors were distributed, and we were our-  
selves again.  
 
" Class-day " is now, I believe, a well-established arrangement.  
This was instituted by the Class of '52. If the custom had  
ever been established, it had long been unobserved. Of this I  
am not informed. We had an oration and a poem in the even-  
ing, after which the class in a body greeted each Professor with  
making their mark in the world. There were none more genial,  
and more worthy than Benjamin and Root the first two schol-  
ars in the class, who were called home to their rest before they  
were permitted to enter upon their life work. They were not  
mere scholars, studying for an appointment, but men of noble pur-  
pose, large hearts and superior endowments, who seemed destined  
to a career of no ordinary importance. Two men could scarcely  
differ more widely than they, and yet both were greatly beloved  
by their fellows. Benjamin was a poor boy. He was " self-  
made." He was exceedingly sensitive and modest, yet sparkling  
with a quiet humor ; and more than all, a Christian of deep expe-  
rience. He had a great head, set upon a small, frail body, and it  
was the laboratory of many a fine thought, expressed often with  
exquisite grace and beauty. Root had a fine form. He was  
athletic, active, very impulsive and enthusiastic, yet restrained  
by Christian principle, ready to dare and do great things, and he  
had the power of imparting enthusiasm to others, which fitted  
him to be a leader. He was looking forward to the law, and  
Benjamin to the Christian ministry. There can be little doubt  
that each would have been eminent in his profession if life had  
been spared. H. N. BARNTTM,  
 
Class of '52.  
 
