CHAPTER XXIV.  
 
OVERSEERS OF THE CHARITY FUND, COMMISSIONERS AND  
TREASURERS.  
 
THE constitution of the Charity Fund " for the greater safety  
and more prompt and easy management of so important a con-  
cern," provides that a Board of Overseers, consisting of at least  
seven in number, shall be appointed by the subscribers to the  
fund, and that the said Board shall perpetuate their existence  
as such by filling their own vacancies. The Board, as originally  
appointed according to the constitution, consisted of the follow-  
ing persons : Henry Gray, Esq., Hon. Salem Towne, Hezekiah  
Wright Strong, Esq., Rev. Theophilus Packard, Rev. Thomas  
Snell, and Rev. Luther Sheldon. Rev. Samuel Osgood was  
elected a member of the Board at its first meeting in August,  
1822. Biographical sketches have already been given of Mr.  
Strong and Dr. Packard, the former among the founders, and the  
latter among the early Trustees of the College. Brief sketches  
will now be given of their colleagues, and of their successors in  
office who have deceased.  
 
Henry Gray, Esq., was a member of the Board from 1821 till  
1833. He was born in Salem, Mass., in 1784. He was the sec-  
ond son of Hon. William Gray, Lieutenant-Governor of Massa-  
chusetts, who was for a short time a Trustee of the College, and  
whose biography has been given in a former chapter. ] Henry  
Gray entered Harvard College in 1798, but, owing to impaired  
eye-sight, he left without graduating in 1800. In 1801 he trav-  
eled in various parts of Europe. A few years later, he engaged  
 
one of the wealthiest merchants of his day in that city. He re-  
sided for some years in Dorchester, where he became a member  
of the Orthodox Congregational Church, under the charge of  
Rev. Dr. Codman. In the year 1830 he removed to New York  
City where he died in 1854, aged seventy. His patrimony was  
so reduced that some of his children would gladly have availed  
themselves of some such provision for an education at Amherst  
as Mr. Wilder unsuccessfully urged the merchant prince of Bos-  
ton to make for his posterity.  
 
Hon. Salem Towne was a member of the Board of Over-  
seers twenty-one years (1821-42). He was born in Charleton,  
Mass., March 26, 1780. Although he was not educated at Col-  
lege, he was well educated in other ways, taught with much*  
success in the public schools, and set so high a value on collegi-  
ate education that he entered his oldest son in the first class that  
entered as Freshmen at Amherst. l He was at one time employed  
by the State in surveying the public lands in Maine.  
 
One incident in his experience as a teacher was quite remark-  
able, and deserves to be narrated here. I have it from Rev. B.  
G. Northrop, Secretary of the Board of Education in Connecti-  
cut, who had it from the lips of Gen. Towne himself. As he  
was about to assume the charge of a school in the north part of  
Charleton, now Southbridge, he was told of one boy who had  
been the plague of the school and the terror of its teachers.  
He resolved, if possible, to win and subdue that boy by kind-  
ness ; and he succeeded so well the first day that when the school  
was dismissed at night, he could and did say to him, " You have  
been a first-rate toy today; I hope you will be the same to-  
morrow." But scarcely had the boy left the school-house, before  
the School Committee came in to say, it was not their intention  
to allow that boy to be a member of the school. The master  
said, he had behaved as well as any boy in school, and he hoped  
he would be allowed to come the next day. The next day, the  
boy came, was treated with the same kindness and confidence,  
and with the same result ; and was dismissed with a similar ex-  
pression of the teacher's approbation. Again the Committee  
called on the teacher, and remonstrated still more decidedly  
 
1 For an anecdote touching this son see p. 95.  
 
against the retention of so perverse and corrupt a boy in the  
school. The teacher replied, that the Committee, of course, had  
the power to do as they chose. But he could not turn him away  
until he should do something which merited dismission. The  
consequence was, that the boy continued through the winter,  
behaved well, improved his opportunities, and became from that  
time another man. That boy was afterwards William L. Marcy,  
Governor of New York, and Secretary of State for the United  
States. And he often declared on public occasions, that Gen.  
Towne made him all that he was. He had been given up by  
parents and friends as well as teachers and school committees,  
and never knew what it was to be called a good boy never  
dreamed of the possibility of his being one, till he was called so  
by his teacher at the opening of that winter school.  
 
Mr. Towne's occupation was that of a farmer. He was ap-  
pointed Justice of the Peace in 1806, and held that office in its  
modified forms and by renewed appointments until his death,  
that is for a period of more than sixty-five years. He was a  
member of the Massachusetts Senate in 1822 and 1823, while  
the Amherst Collegiate Institution was suing for a charter, and  
was a warm advocate for its incorporation. In 1856, he was  
again elected to the Senate, of which he was the oldest mem-  
ber, being then in the seventy-sixth year of his age.  
 
Being chosen Colonel of a regiment, he was in command of it  
at North Boston in the last war with Great Britain, in 1814 ;  
when he left, he was promoted to the rank of Brigadier-General,  
and in 1819, he received the appointment of Major-General.  
member of the Congregational Church in Charleton. Although  
he was so late in coming into the church, yet, his pastor writes, 1  
" he has always been one of the most efficient supporters of the  
 
1 Rev. John Haven, to whom I am indebted for most of the facts contained in  
this sketch.  
 
Fund, 1 and for that reason, as well as his friendship for the  
College, and his general character, he was chosen one of the  
original Overseers of that fund, which, in the language of the  
Constitution was "to be the basis or main pillar of the College,"  
and of which he was, for a score of years, a wise and faithful  
guardian.  
 
Gen. Towne enjoyed comfortable health till he was more than  
fourscore years and ten, and died, after a short sickness, on the  
15th of February, 1872, in the ninety-second year of his age.  
An anecdote went the round of the newspapers soon after his  
death, which, while it plays upon his name, is said to be illustra-  
tive of his character. When Gen. Towne was a member of the  
Senate, President Quincy, wishing to secure his vote for some  
measure, had an interview with him and supposed he had ac-  
complished his object. But when the question came up, the  
General's vote was cast on the other side. And the President  
declared publicly, that he ought thenceforth to be known no  
longer as Salem Town but as Marblehead Town. He seems to  
have had a mind of his own, and at the same time to have been  
forty years (1821-60) a longer period than any other Over-  
seer, or any Trustee, except Dr. Vaill, has ever been connected  
with Amherst College. He was born at Fryeburg, Me., Febru-  
ary 8, 1784, graduated at Dartmouth College in 1805, studied  
law a short time at Hanover, N. H., then taught school and  
read theolog} r at Dorchester, Mass., preached a few times, first  
at Roxbury and then at Quincy where he had the two Adamses  
for hearers, in 1807 went to Princeton, N. J., where he remained  
about a year studying theology with Dr. Samuel Smith, and  
preaching occasionally in the vicinity, and after preaching four  
Sabbaths as the thirty-seventh candidate, he was ordained and  
installed pastor of the Congregational Church in Springfield,  
 
of Doctor of Divinity from the College of New Jersey. In 1854,  
Rev. Henry M. Parsons was settled as his colleague, and Dr.  
Osgood retired from active duty among his own people, but still  
continued to preach quite constantly in the vacant pulpits of the  
vicinity. On the 25th of June, 1859, having completed fifty  
gregational Church in Springfield. Of course, his labors were  
arduous ; and he was a great power in the community. In 1815,  
the boldness and plainness with which he preached " the dis-  
tinguishing doctrines of the gospel," led to a secession of fifty-  
four persons from the parish, and the formation of a Unitarian  
society. The majority of the parish remained with the minister ;  
but the division created a great excitement in Springfield, second  
only to that " when nearly a century before, Rev. Robert Breck  
was arrested by a sheriff with a drawn sword for ' treason against  
the King of Heaven.' " l  
 
In the pulpit, he had few of the graces of style or elocution.  
His sermons drew their illustrations chiefly from the Scriptures,  
and his prayers took their form and expression as well as their  
sentiment and spirit largely from the same source. The plain-  
ness of his person, the simplicity of his manners and the freedom  
and boldness, not to say bluntness, of his Anglo-Saxon speech,  
gave additional pungency to his condemnation of sin, and his  
denunciation of sinners. " His blunt and honest reproofs are  
laid up in many a memory ; yet he was as sympathetic as a child  
with all who were unfortunate. No ears were ever more ac-  
cessible to the tale of woe than his, and the wronged man was.  
always sure of a friend in him." 2 We saw only the friendly and  
kindly side of him as he came to Amherst from year to year, for  
forty years, in the discharge of his official duties till his face was  
as welcome, and in those days almost as familiar on the Com-  
mencement stage, as that of Dr. Vaill.  
 
" One of the pleasantest reminiscences of the life of Dr. Os-  
good was his connection with the Academy at Fryeburg, when  
it was under the charge of Daniel Webster, and the association  
 
1 Obituary notice of Dr. Osgood in The Springfield Republican. 2 Ibid.  
 
of that eminent man with the duties of his father's office.  
James Osgood of Fiyeburg, the father of Dr. Osgood. was the  
Register of Deeds of whom Mr. Webster speaks in his autobi-  
ography, as having given him employment in the business of  
recording. The acquaintance was thus early commenced, and  
was kept up, we believe, during Mr. Webster's life.  
 
" The funeral of Dr. Osgood was held on Friday afternoon,  
December 12, in the First Congregational Church. The church  
was draped in mourning, and wreaths of flowers were strewn  
upon the coffin. The church began to be filled at an early hour,  
and by the time for the services to commence, every seat was  
occupied, and many were crowded into the aisles. The city  
government attended in a body, and many members of the Ma-  
sonic fraternity. His colleague, Rev. Henry M. Parsons, offered  
prayer, Rev. Mr. Buckingham of the South Church read from  
the Scriptures. The sermon was preached by Rev. Dr. Sprague  
of Albany." l  
 
Rev. Luther Sheldon, D. D., 2 was a member of the Board of  
Overseers fifteen years (1821-36). He was born in Rupert, Vt.,  
February 18, 1785. He was the son of Judge David Sheldon  
who originated in Suffield, Conn.; and he worked on his father's  
large farm until he was twenty-one. He had entertained a  
Christian hope for some years and wished to study for the min-  
istry, but out of deference to his father's wish that he should stay  
with him on the farm, he remained until he was legally free. He  
then entered Middlebury College, where he graduated in 1808.  
He studied theology, as was then the custom, with a neighboring  
Upon this he brought up and educated a family of five children.  
He was settled about the same time with Dr. Codman of Dor-  
chester, and Dr. Storrs of Braintree, and was always quite inti-  
 
2 I am indebted for this sketch of Dr. Sheldon, chiefly to his son, Rev. L. H.  
Sheldon, D. D., who is at the head of a flourishing school in Jamesburg, N. J.  
 
wives, their theological discussions and their genial and instruct-  
ive table-talk.  
 
The great event of his parochial life was his famous lawsuit  
with the Unitarians, when the}* prevented him from going into  
his pulpit to preach. He sued the parish for his salary, and they  
kept it in law for seven years, when he recovered his salary with  
interest for the whole time. Then they made him go back and  
preach in the old house, although his church and his friends in  
the parish had meanwhile built him a new house, and he had  
preached in it for years. He went back and preached orthodoxy  
to them till they were glad to divide the fund, compromise the  
matter with him and dismiss him in the regular way. This famous  
suit, which is fully reported in the Massachusetts Law Reports, 1  
settled several important questions touching the rights of minis-  
ters and the manner in which they can and can not be dismissed.  
Such for instance as these : That the refusal of a minister to  
make exchanges with certain other ministers in the vicinity  
is not a sufficient ground for dismission ; nor his neglect to re-  
ply to communications from the parish on that subject ; nor the  
finding by an ex-parte Council that he had " lost the confidence  
of a large portion of his parishioners in his moral honesty and  
integrity," as it did not show whether such portion was a minor-  
ity or majority of the parishioners, nor that the loss of confi-  
dence was owing to any fault on the part of the minister. Such  
cases as those of Dr. Osgood and Dr. Sheldon illustrate the times  
ezer Snell and Sarah Packard, was born in Cummington, Xo-  
vember 21, 1774. Having pursued the preparatory studies about  
two years under the tuition of his pastor, Rev. James Briggs, he  
entered Dartmouth College in 1791, and graduated in 1795, two  
years after President Moore, and in the same class with Dr.  
Worcester, first Secretary of the American Board, and several  
 
men who were afterwards distinguished in civil and political  
life. From a letter written by him in 1848, it appears that  
there were only four professors of religion in his class, and he  
did not become experimentally a Christian till the year after his  
graduation, when he was teaching an academy in Haverhill,  
N. H. The next year he studied theology with Dr. Backus of  
Somers, Conn., with Dr. Woods, Dr. Church, and Dr. Porter  
of Catskill, N. Y., for his fellow-students. He was licensed to  
preach by the Tolland Association, October 3, 1797, and after  
preaching between five and six months as a candidate, was or-  
dained and installed pastor of the church in North Brookfield,  
then the second precinct in Brookfield. Mr. Snell was the sec-  
ond minister in the Commonwealth (his friend Rev. Zephaniah  
SwiffcoMoore of Leicester being the first,) in whose terms of set-  
tlement provision was made for a dismission. It was customary  
at that time to settle a minister for life. In this case, it was  
provided, in brief, that if two -thirds of the legal voters in the  
society should express a desire for his dismission two years in  
succession, the first year in writing, and the next year by vote  
at a legal meeting called for that purpose, he should consider  
himself discharged from his ministerial relation, and from that  
time relinquish any further demand for services, provided how-  
ever, (a provision made by the desire of the pastor-elect,) that  
the dismission should be by a council called for that purpose.  
" These provisions for his dismission, Dr. Snell testified in his old  
age, were the means of preventing such an occurrence ; for, at  
times, the opposition which he encountered was such that, had he  
been settled for life, his enemies would probably have succeeded  
in obtaining a majority against him and in driving him away at  
some time of excitement." l In less than two years after his set-  
tlement, an article was introduced into the parish warrant com-  
plaining of " his exorbitant salary," which' was then four hun-  
dred dollars. Four years later, complaints still continuing to be  
made, particularly on account of his salary, the pastor procured  
an article to be inserted in the warrant, by which a vote was  
taken, and one hundred expressed a desire that he should re-  
 
1 Discourse of Rev. Christopher Gushing, to which I am indebted largely for the  
 
main, and thirty voted against him. 1 At different times after-  
wards, the lofty and bold stand which he took on the subject of  
Temperance, and still later on the subject of Slavery, together  
with the uncompromising orthodoxy of his preaching which  
always excited more or less opposition in the parish, raised a  
storm which threatened the permanency of the pastoral relation.  
But a large majority of the society always sustained him. He  
was still more strongly rooted in the confidence and affections  
of the church. He continued the sole pastor of the church  
more than fifty-three years, and he sustained the pastoral rela-  
tion till his death, almost sixty-four years. His pecuniary sup-  
port, though never very large, was increased during the latter  
part of his ministry, and from time to time augmented by special  
grant or by personal contribution, and a large sum was paid  
after all claim for service was surrendered; in short, although  
like Dr. Osgood and Dr. Sheldon, he was sometimes obliged to  
stand up for his rights, and often placed in circumstances which  
reminded him that he belonged to the church militant, yet his  
people, to their credit not less than his, rallied around him and  
manifested their confidence and affection more and more with  
every year, even to the last, of his long and faithful ministry.  
 
In the early part of Dr. SnelFs ministry the close of the last  
and the beginning of the present century revivals of religion  
were comparatively unfrequent, and he labored nineteen j^ears  
without any such season of refreshing among his own people.  
in education, temperance, civil liberty, and every other good  
cause at home, he was emphatically a public man whose influ-  
ence was widely felt in other churches and through the commu-  
nity. " For fifty years during which the Brookfield Association  
of Congregational ministers held one hundred and seventy-five  
meetings, he was absent from only twelve, and never during  
that long time did he fail to fulfill an appointment assigned him  
 
1 Fifteen voted against him at the time of his settlement.  
 
2 North Brookfield was comparatively poor and unpopulous during Dr. Snell's  
active ministry.  
 
by his brethren." For twenty-five years he was the Secretary of  
the Massachusetts ' General Association. He was present at the  
meeting of the Association, in 1810, when the American Board  
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions was organized, and was a  
corporate member of the Board from 1838 till the close of his  
life. He gave to the public twenty-four sermons, pamphlets or  
tracts, among which was an oration on the 5th of Jul} T , 1813 ;  
a sermon before the General Association of Massachusetts in  
1814; the election sermon before the Governor, Council and  
Legislature in 1817; extract from a sermon delivered at the  
interment of President Moore in 1823 ; sermons on the fortieth  
and fiftieth anniversary of his settlement; and two historical  
discourses, the one in 1850 containing an historical sketch of  
the tofc r n of North Brookfield, and the other in 1852, a centen-  
nial history of the First Congregational Church in that town.  
 
Mr. Snell became a Trustee of Williams College in 1817,  
probably at the instance of his friend and old neighbor, Presi-  
dent Moore; entered his son there in 1818, and continued  
a member of the Board until Amherst received a charter in  
1825. He was a member of the Convention at Amherst in 1818,  
and voted with the majority in favor of establishing the College  
there ; voted with President Moore and the majority in favor of  
removing Williams College to Amherst ; took a lively interest  
and an active part in all the plans and efforts for founding Am-  
herst College ; did the best thing he ever did for it in transfer-  
ring his son, Ebenezer, with President Moore, at the opening in  
1821, and never ceased to feel a deep interest in its prosperity.  
" At the organization of the Board of Overseers of the Charity  
Fund, he was made a member and chosen Secretary, and al-  
though the office of Secretary of that Board is an annual one,  
no other individual was chosen to fill that office for fifteen years.  
He remained a member of the Board thirty-three years. And  
during this long term he was never absent from his post but once,  
and then it was because he felt that the state of religious inter-  
est among his own people demanded his presence at home.  
When his declining years rendered it impossible for him to dis-  
charge the duties of a member of the Board, he at once sent in  
 
bilities of which he could not meet. The College with which  
he was thus officially connected, showed their appreciation of  
which he never fully recovered. Yet more than three years af-  
ter this, he wrote and delivered a sermon on the sixtieth anni-  
versary of his settlement. He died May 4, 1862, at the age of  
eighty-seven. He was then the oldest pastor in the Common-  
wealth. He lived to bury all the Church and all the Society  
over which he was installed. The Memorial Discourses deliv-  
ered at his funeral by his successor, Rev. Christopher Gushing,  
and his spiritual " son," Rev. Lyman Whiting, contain many  
anecdotes and illustrations which present him in some aspects of  
rare moral sublimity as a divine of the Puritan type, and scarcely  
less sententious in his utterances, or commanding in his presence,  
than the lawgiver and prophets of the Old Dispensation.  
 
For twelve years (1821-1833) no vacancy occurred in the  
Board of Overseers, either by death or by resignation. Of the  
fifteen individuals who have come in since 1833, five have de-  
ceased, three of the survivors have resigned, and the remainder  
constitute the present Board.  
 
Henry Penniman, Esq., who was elected in the place of  
Henry Gray, Esq., (resigned in 1833,) was born in Mendon,  
Mass., September 3, 1773, and died in New Braintree, March 29,  
1851, aged seventy -eight years. He resigned his trust in 1844,  
being then over seventy, and having been a member eleven  
years. A man of strict integrity and excellent judgment, highly  
intelligent though without a College education, he was often Se-  
lectman and was much trusted and looked up to in town affairs.  
Having been chosen to the command of a regiment of volun-  
teers, he was generally known as Col. Penniman. He was a  
liberal supporter of the institutions of religion and a leading  
man in the parish, but never became a member of the church.  
A prosperous farmer, one of the solid men of New Braintree,  
and belonging to Dr. Fiske's congregation, he became early in-  
terested in Amherst College (how could he help it), sent his son  
 
1 Mr. Cushing's Discourse.  
 
there, although an older son had been educated at Cambridge,  
and early contributed to its funds. How much or how often he  
gave is not known, but a donation of two hundred dollars for  
the increase of the Library is commemorated in a letter from  
President Humphrey, which, being also a letter of condolence  
on the death of his son, has been preserved by the family. The  
following extracts, while they serve as a memorial of Col. Penni-  
man's liberality, also illustrate the character of President Hum-  
phrey and the value which was then set upon such donations.  
 
AMHERST COLLEGE, January 1, 1827.  
 
My Dear Sir : Having been absent when your donation of  
two hundred dollars for the increase of our College Library was  
received, permit me now, in the name of the Trustees and Fac-  
ulty and Students, to present you our very grateful acknowledg-  
ments for this more than generous benefaction. May the Lord  
reward you a thousand fold into your bosom. No designation  
of your bounty could have been more acceptable than that which  
you have made, as it will enable us immediately to purchase  
comes from a friend whose proud hopes have just been en-  
tombed with a beloved son who was a member of the Institu-  
tion. 1 I need not say, how he endeared himself to all his in-  
structors and fellow-students, nor how deep a throb of anguish  
it caused us when he expired. Dear youth, he came forth as a  
flower and was cut down. May his early death be sanctified to  
his doting parents and to all his brothers and sisters. Most ten-  
derly do we still sympathize with you in this great and sore be-  
reavement. May you find it in your hearts to say, " The Lord  
dren, I am, dear sir, your sincere and most obliged friend,  
 
HEMAN HUMPHREY.  
 
1 William Penniman of New Braintree was a member of the Class of '29, and  
died in his Sophomore year.  
 
Rev. Cyrus Mann was connected with the Board of Overseers  
eighteen years, having been elected in 1836 and resigned in  
1854. He was a graduate of Dartmouth College in the Class  
of 1806, and the following epitome of the principal facts in his  
life is taken from Dr. Chapman's Sketches of the Alumni of  
Dartmouth College : " Cyrus Mann, A. M., the son of John and  
Lydia (Porter) Mann, was born at Oxford, N. H., April 3, 1785,  
and died at Stoughton, Mass., February 9, 1859, aged seventy-  
three. He was principal of Gilmanton Academy, two years ;  
teacher of the High School at Troy, N. Y., one year, studying  
law the while with Stephen Ross ; was tutor at Dartmouth from  
1809 to 1814, studying divinity during the time with Rev. Prof.  
Shurtleff, D. D., of Dartmouth College ; ordained pastor of the  
Congregational Church at Westminster, Mass., February 22,  
1855 ; dismissed June 9, 1841, after an effective service of rising  
twenty-six years ; then supplied the Robinson Church, Ply-  
mouth, Mass., three years ; next a teacher at Lowell, Mass., for  
several years ; lastly acting pastor of the Congregational Church  
at North Falmouth, Mass., from 1852 to 1856. His publications  
were a ' Treatise on Trigonometry ; ' an ' Epitome of the Evi-  
dences of Christianity;' a 'History of the Temperance Refor-  
mation ; ' a Memoir of Mrs. Myra W. Allen, wife of Rev. Da-  
vid O. Allen of the Bombay Mission, with some sermons."  
 
Thomas Bond, Esq., was born at North Brookfield, September  
11, 1777, and died in Springfield, January 6, 1852, at the age of  
seventy-four. Well taught in the public schools and sitting in  
his childhood and youth under the preaching of such ministers  
as Dr. Snell and his predecessor, he did not need a collegiate  
education to appreciate the value of Colleges or to become the  
life-long friend of the Institution at Amherst. He was a mer-  
chant in West Brookfield until 1825, when he retired with a  
competent fortune and settled in Springfield. At different times  
he represented both West Brookfield and Springfield in the Mas-  
sachusetts Legislature. During his residence in Springfield,  
he was a member of the First Congregational Church (Dr. Os-  
good's) till a few years after the formation of the South Church  
(now Dr. Buckingham's,) when he felt it his duty to connect  
 
time of his death. He showed his faith in Amherst College by  
educating two sons in it, one of whom is now a member of the  
Board of Overseers, and his love for it by repeated donations to  
the Library and the Cabinet. Twenty-seven years a resident  
of Springfield, and thirteen years an Overseer of the Fund at  
seers sixteen years, (1846-1862). He was born in Pelham,  
May 7, 1788, and died in Amherst, October 13, 1862, aged sev-  
enty-four. His father, John Conkey, was a strong-minded and  
intelligent farmer. His mother was the daughter of Rev. Rob-  
ert Abercrombie, a native of Edinburg, Scotland ; and his edu-  
cation, Jbeyond what he could obtain in the common schools of  
his native town and by a brief connection with the Academy at  
New Salem, he received from his maternal grandfather, who  
was highly esteemed as a man of learning and piety. Com-  
pelled by his pecuniary necessities to abandon the idea of a lib-  
eral education, he studied law with Noah D. Mattoon, Esq., in  
Amherst ; and in 1814 he opened an office in his native town  
and remained there until 1817, when on the removal of Mr.  
Mattoon to Ohio, he succeeded him in the practice of his pro-  
fession in Amherst. In 1828, he accepted the office of Special  
Commissioner and 'in 1830 that of County Commissioner. In  
1834, by appointment of Gov. Armstrong, he succeeded Hon.  
Samuel Hinckley as Judge of Probate for Hampshire County,  
and retained the office until 1858, when the Court was abolished  
and the Courts of Probate and Insolvency were united. In  
1853, Judge Conkey was a member of the Convention for revis-  
ing the Constitution of the State ; in 1859, a Trustee of Oliver  
Smith's will. He was for many years a Trustee of Amherst  
Academy, and at the time of his death he was the Treasurer of  
that Institution. He was a member and a firm supporter of  
the church in East Amherst. He never ceased to feel an inter-  
est in the place of his nativity, and in 1843, he delivered the  
address, (which was published,) on the one hundredth anniver-  
sary of the settlement of the town of Pelham. Rising above  
the local prejudices which for a time existed in that part of the  
 
town in which he resided, he became a true friend and faithful  
Trustee both of the Academy and the College, and joined with  
other citizens of Amherst in contributing to its funds.  
 
Hon. Edward Southworth was thirteen years a member of  
the Board, from his election in 1856 till his death in 1869. He  
also was a native of Pelham a town whose name is a by-word  
with students, now, but which ranked above Amherst in the  
olden times and has been the birthplace of many excellent men.  
Constant Southworth, the earliest ancestor of Edward on this  
side of the Atlantic, was the son-in-law of Gov. Bradford,  
brought up in his family and a person of distinction in the  
Plymouth Colony. Edward Southworth, the son of Dr. Abia  
Southworth of Pelham and Keziah Boltwood of Amherst, was  
born July 3, 1804. He was the youngest of three sons, of  
whom the eldest, Rufus, was a successful teacher in Charleston,  
S. C., and the second, Wells, is an extensive manufacturer who  
resides at New Haven, and is widely known as a generous bene-  
factor of literary, charitable and religious institutions. 1 Fitted  
for College in part in Amherst Academy under the instruction  
of Gerard Hallock, he entered at Cambridge in 1822, and grad-  
uated with high honor in the Class of '26, with such class-  
mates as Nehemiah Adams, Richard Hildreth, Andrew P. Pea-  
body, Willard Parker and Samuel H. Walley. For the first  
seven years after his graduation he was a teacher of Languages  
in Charleston, S. C.  
 
Constrained by ill-health to relinquish teaching, he came North  
and devoted himself to manufacturing and mercantile pursuits,  
which he prosecuted with great success, residing for a few years  
at South Hadley Falls and Chicopee, and then removing to  
West Springfield where he spent the last thirty years of his life  
distinguished alike for his capacity and integrity in business, and  
his Christian activity, influence and usefulness. " He was dig-  
nified and yet easy of approach, genial and generous, but above  
all was unswerving in his integrity. So well was this under-  
stood that in financial circles his credit was unlimited. And it  
was for this reason that his name and co-operation were so  
eagerly solicited by the organizers of new enterprises, anxious  
 
1 He is the founder of the Southworth Scholarship for the Class of '22.  
 
to secure the favor of a discriminating public ; and by this  
means that he came to be an officer or shareholder in almost  
numberless corporations. At the time of his decease, he was  
president of the Hampshire Paper Company, Massasoit Paper  
Company, Hampden Paint and Chemical Company ; treasurer  
of the Southworth Manufacturing Company ; director of the  
Agawam National Bank, Springfield Fire and Marine Insurance  
Company, City Fire Insurance Company of New Haven, Ct.,  
Agawam Canal Company, Springfield and Farmington Valley-  
Railroad ; and trustee of Hampden Savings Bank, of Funds at  
Amherst College, and of Mount Holyoke Seminary." 1 Chosen  
at the same election a member both of the Senate and the  
House of Representatives, (1853,) he resigned his place in the  
former and took a seat in the latter, because, though the less  
In many ways he manifested a life-long interest in sound learn-  
ing and Christian education. He made annual visits to his  
Alma Mater. He rarely failed to attend the Commencement  
at Amherst, and the Anniversary of Mount Holyoke Seminary.  
When that Seminary was established, he gave to its building  
fund full one-tenth of all his property. In connection with his  
brother, Wells Southworth, he founded the course of lectures on  
Congregationalism at Andover Theological Seminary. To every  
good cause, he was a liberal and a cheerful giver.  
 
A member and an officer in the First Congregational Church  
in West Springfield, " a man of prayer," " a believer in revivals,"  
a superintendent or teacher in the Sabbath School, it is the tes-  
timony of his pastor, that " there was no time, certainly in the  
later years of his life, when he did not seem all ready for Chris-  
tian work. Like a faithful shepherd caring for the spiritual  
flock, he went from house to house, consecrating to such visita-  
tions the afternoons of successive days and weeks." It was the  
 
ing in which he felt an especial interest ; and then, while others  
went to the place of prayer, he sought the couch from which he  
was never to rise. He died December 11, 1869, at the age of  
sixty-five, a rare example of scholarly tastes, genial manners  
and active piety in one who, for almost forty years, was engaged  
in so many forms of important and successful business.  
 
Few members, either of the Corporation or of the Board of  
Overseers, have been better friends, wiser counselors or more  
faithful servants of the College than Dea. A. W. Porter of  
Monson, Hon. William Hyde of Ware, and Hon. J. B. Woods  
of Enfield, who, after having held the office of Overseers of  
the Charity Fund, the first for twenty-two years (1842-64,)  
the second for fifteen years (1845-60,) and the third for six  
(1850-6,) resigned the trust not because they wanted interest  
in the College, but because, with advancing years or numerous  
other cares and responsibilities, they could not perform the  
duties of the office.  
 
Dea. Porter (I give him the title by \vhich he is so uni-  
versally known in Western Massachusetts) is and long has been  
the Treasurer, the Steward, the guardian and father of Mount  
Holyoke Seminary, which he loves, cherishes and provides for as  
a darling child. At the same time he has contributed many  
times and in many ways to the funds of Amherst College, 1 was  
a member of the Building Committee, and gave time, business  
talent and experience, worth more than money, to the erection  
of the Woods Cabinet and Lawrence Observatory, and for almost  
a quarter of a century was a wise, watchful and faithful guard-  
for the Woods Cabinet and the Barrett Gymnasium. Besides  
raising the money for the building which bears his name, estab-  
lishing the Woods Prize so unique and characteristic of him-  
 
dent and Professors, lie rendered a service in turning the tide  
of public confidence and sympathy in favor of the College  
(already spoken of in another chapter) which entitles him to a  
name and a place among the restorers and second founders of  
Amherst College.  
 
Mr. Hyde, being one of those men who, for their wisdom, in-  
tegrity, and public spirit, are sought and solicited to undertake  
more public trusts than they can discharge, was for some time  
at once a Trustee of Williston Seminary, a Trustee of Williams  
College, and an Overseer of the Charity Fund at Amherst. But  
he felt constrained at length to resign all but the Trusteeship  
of Williams which is his Alma Mater. These gentlemen have  
all held other important and honorable public trusts of a social,  
Christopher Gushing, D. D., the accurate, methodical, acute  
and business-like, though clerical, Secretary of the American  
Congregational Union, who succeeded Rev. Dr. Snell in this  
trust as he had previously succeeded him in the pastoral office,  
and who keeps the records and watches the accounts of the  
Charity Fund with the same sleepless vigilance with which he  
guards the interests of the Congregational churches ; Rev. Row-  
land Ayres, Philosophical Orator of the Class of '41, Tutor from  
1844 to 1846, and now the veteran pastor of the First Church  
in Old Hadley, as sound in the faith as any of his predecessors  
in that ancient pulpit, and not less sensible and judicious than  
the wisest of them all; Hon. Charles Adams, many years the  
Enfield, November 18, 1796, and died in the same place, May 15, 1872, in the  
seventy-sixth year of his age. He fitted for college, with such guidance and in-  
struction as he could get from his pastor, Rev. Mr. Joshua Crosby. But his me-  
chanical and inventive genius was found so useful in the manufacturing business,  
then starting in Enfield, that he could not be spared to go to college. It was the  
machine for manufacturing cards which he invented, that brought him into such  
intimate relations to the Lawrences and other manufacturers in the vicinity of  
Boston. In 1846, Mr. Woods represented Hampshire County in the Massachusetts  
Senate.  
 
tives, two years a member of the Senate, four years a member  
of the Governor's Council, and now the Treasurer of the Com-  
monwealth : Rev. John M. Greene, of the Class of '53, Tutor in  
1855-7, Trustee and Secretary of Mount Holyoke Seminary,  
father of Smith College at Northampton, the earnest pastor and  
the zealous friend of education, of whom Prof. Park so facetiously  
said in his address at our semi-centennial : " Long after my name  
shall have faded away and dropped like a sere and yellow leaf  
from the remembrance of men, the name of that man will still  
be Greene ; " Ephraim "W. Bond, Esq., valedictorian of the Class  
of '41, who, with a capacity for business equal to his scholar-  
ship, has proved his fitness to take care of the property of the  
College by the skill and success with which he has taken care  
of his own ; His Excellency, William B. Washburn, who, in hu  
private business and in his numerous public trusts among which  
the interests of education 1 have held a place scarcely less promi-  
nent or important than those of the State and the nation, has  
truly represented the practical wisdom and the unswerving in-  
tegrity which characterize the people of the old Bay State, and  
which Massachusetts delights to honor ; and Eleazar Porter, Esq.,  
the founder of the Porter Prize and the Porter Scholarship,  
whose prudence and thrift, as a man of business, are so evenly  
and so beautifully balanced by his intelligent and Christian lib-  
it would seem that there have been only two Financiers, or Com-  
missioners of the Charity Fund, during the entire history of the  
College. This, however, is incorrect. We have no records  
prior to the charter, and the annual catalogues do not insert the  
name of the Financier until 1825. But the fact appears to be  
that Col. Graves had charge of the collections and investments  
of the Charity Fund during this period, paying over the income  
as it was collected, to the College Treasurer. At the first an-  
nual meeting of the Trustees after the charter in 1825, they  
chose Col. Graves, Financier for one year. At the annual meet-  
 
1 Gov. Washburn is a Trustee of the Massachusetts Agricultural College at Am-  
 
ing in 1826, the Constitution of the Charity Fund was so  
amended by the joint action of both Boards, that the same per-  
son might hold both offices, and Dea. Leland, being elected  
Financier as well as Treasurer, held both offices till 1833. Then  
it being deemed expedient to separate the offices again, Dea.  
Leland retained the office of Treasurer, and Esq. Boltwood was  
chosen Financier. Since that time, there have been but two in-  
cumbents in charge of the Charity Fund, Lucius Boltwood,  
Esq., holding the office of Financier from 1833 to 1866, and Luke  
Sweetser, Esq., being Commissioner, as the office is now called,  
from 1866 to the present time. The lives of Col. Graves and  
Dea. Leland have been sketched in former chapters. Mr. Bolt-  
wood and Mr. Sweetser are both still living. But they have  
sustained so many and such important relations to the College  
College of the Class of 1814, a student of law in the office of  
Samuel Fowler Dickinson till 1817, and a lawyer in his native  
town from that time till 1836, a Trustee of Amherst Academy  
for almost half a century and much of the time Secretary of  
that Board, Secretary of the Corporation of Amherst College  
from 1828 to 1864, Commissioner of the Charity Fund with a  
salary of only two hundred dollars a year from 1833 to 1866,  
the first candidate of the Liberal Party for Governor of the  
Commonwealth at a time when such a candidacy was deemed a  
reproach, Lucius Boltwood lived to celebrate in his eightieth  
year the fiftieth anniversary of the College of which he helped  
to lay the foundations, and still lives the only resident of the  
terials to Mr. Boltwood who doubtless knows more of the history of Amherst Col-  
lege than any man living. Since the text and this note were written, Mr. Bolt-  
wood has deceased. He died July 10, 1872.  
 
chant of the village. Retiring at length from mercantile busi-  
ness, he gave himself for several years to farming, with the ap-  
plications of science and all the modern improvements, and has  
become well known to the farmers of Massachusetts as a raiser  
of fancy stock, and by his connection with Agricultural Societies  
and with the State Board of Agriculture. From 1851 he was a  
deacon of the village church till in 1871 he resigned the office.  
Although he has had little to do with politics, he has always  
held a prominent and influential place in the town and in public  
affairs. He was chosen a member of the Prudential Committee  
of the College every year from 1833 till 1864, when, much to  
the regret of the Trustees and the Faculty, he declined a re-  
election. During the whole time of his connection with it, he  
was the Secretary of the Prudential Committee, kept the records  
with exemplary care, 1 and was, more than any other member,  
the agent and executive of the Committee. He was a member,  
and the most active member, of the Building Committee in the  
erection of the Appleton Cabinet and East College, and in or-  
der to remove the chief argument for locating the former be-  
tween the Woods Cabinet and the President's house, he gave  
one thousand dollars to attach a geological lecture room to the  
Woods Cabinet. On the resignation of Mr. Boltwood in 1864,  
Mr. Sweetser was chosen Commissioner in his place ; and among  
all the officials connected with Amherst College, there is none  
in the wisdom and fidelity of whose administration more general  
confidence is reposed than in that of Mr. Sweetser.  
 
Amherst College has had only two Treasurers during the en-  
tire half-century of its existence. Hon. John Leland held the  
office the first fourteen years from 1821 to 1835. Hon. Edward  
Dickinson has been Treasurer from 1835 to the present time.  
A biographical sketch of the former has already been given. 2  
Some notice of the latter, although still in office, is due not only  
to the man who has held it for almost forty years, but to the  
history of the College to which he has so long sustained so im-  
portant a relation.  
 
Edward Dickinson, the son of Hon Samuel Fowler Dickinson,  
 
1 The Records cease with Mr. Sweetser's resignation, and so far as appears, none  
have since been kept. 2 See p. 240.  
 
who was one of the principal founders of the College, 1 was born  
in Amherst on the 1st of January, 1803 ; was educated in the  
public schools of Amherst, and in Amherst Academy, till he  
was prepared to enter College ; was a member of the first Jun-  
ior class in the Collegiate Institution at Amherst although the  
other three years of his collegiate course were at Yale where  
he graduated in 1823 ; studied law two years in his father's  
office in Amherst, and a third year in the Northampton Law  
School under Professors Elijah H. Mills, Judge Samuel Howe  
and John H. Ashmun ; opened a law office in Amherst in  
1826, in which he has continued the practice of his profession  
for almost fifty years, and during a large part of the half-cent-  
ury has been the leading lawyer in the place ; represented the  
town of Amherst in the Legislature in 1833 and 1839; has  
taken the lead in those efforts and struggles which, in spite  
of natural obstacles and adverse circumstances, have brought  
two great lines of railway to Amherst and made it quite a rail-  
road centre ; has acted an equally influential part in regard to  
schools, churches and public improvements ; in short, has been so  
long and so fully identified with the town, the first parish and the  
College, that the history of either of them can not be written  
without writing also the principal events in his life. At the  
same time, his activity and influence have not been confined  
within the limits of his native town. In 1842 and 1843, he  
was a member of the Massachusetts Senate. In 1845 and 1846,  
he was a member of the Governor's Council when George N.  
Briggs was Governor. From 1853 to 1855 he was a member  
of Congress. Since 1850 he has been a member of the First  
Congregational Church.  
 
Mr. Dickinson has made enemies by his unbending firmness  
of purpose and his great freedom and boldness of speech under  
excitement; but no enemy, whether personal or political, has ever  
questioned the integrity of his character, the purity of his life, or  
the breadth, depth and intensity of his public spirit. A liberal  
 
propriations for public improvements. The best financier in the  
Corporation has publicly announced, as the result of careful ex-  
amination for many successive years, that, as Treasurer of Am-  
herst College, he has never lost a dollar. And one of the sharp-  
est and shrewdest of the Board of Overseers declares that after  
the most prolonged and patient scrutiny of his books and ac-  
counts, only a single error of less than a hundred dollars could  
be detected, and that error was against himself. At the age of  
threescore years and ten Mr. Dickinson still stands erect, per-  
pendicular, with his senses of seeing and hearing unimpaired,  
with his natural force and fire chastened and subdued but  
scarcely abated, one of the firmest pillars of society, echication,  
order, morality and every good cause in our community.  
 
