CHAPTER II.  
 
AMHERST FIRST NAMED AS THE BEST SITE FOR A COLLEGE  
AMHERST AS IT THEN WAS.  
 
THE first associated action on record, looking towards the  
establishment of a College at Amherst, was at a meeting of the  
Franklin County Association of ministers, held in Shelburne, in  
1815. This was six years before the College came into exist-  
ence, and was prior even to the incorporation of Amherst  
Academy, out of which the College grew. The record reads as  
follows: "Shelburne, May 10, 1815. At a meeting of the  
Franklin Association, holden at the house of Rev. Theophilus  
Packard, were present Revs. Messrs. Samuel Taggart, Josiah  
Spaulding, Jonathan Grout, Joseph Field, Theophilus Packard,  
Thomas A. Wood, Moses Miller, Alvan Sanderson, Josiah W.  
Cannon. The following questions were proposed by Brother  
Packard for the opinion of this body, viz. : 1. Whether a Col-  
lege would be likely to flourish in some central town of Old  
Hampshire County, and be promotive of knowledge and virtue in  
the State. 2. What town thus centrally situated, all circum-  
stances considered, appeared to them most eligible for such an  
institution? The body, on mature deliberation, were of the  
opinion that knowledge and virtue might be greatly subserved  
by a literary institution .situated in that important section of the  
Commonwealth. They were also unanimously agreed that, all  
things considered, the town of Amherst appeared to them the  
most eligible place for locating it." 1  
 
Several things are particularly worthy of notice in this trans-  
action. In the first place, the first associated action, and, so far  
 
1 See Historical Discourse of Rev. Theophilus Packard, at the Centennial of  
 
as appears, the first impulse and movement towards the estab-  
lishment of a College in Amherst, was not in Amherst nor even  
in Hampshire County, but in Franklin, and that not at a meeting  
in the valley of the Connecticut, but among the mountains west  
of the valley, where so many great and good men and measures  
have had their origin. This fact effectually disposes of the  
charges so often reiterated by the enemies of the College in  
former years, that it had its origin in sectional prejudices and  
local interests.  
 
In the second place we see clearly and positively what were  
the considerations which influenced the first movers in the enter-  
prise. Overlooking all local preferences and all personal inter-  
ests they inquire only whether a College in some central part of  
old Hampshire County would be likely to flourish and to promote  
knowledge and virtue, and then what town, all things considered,  
would be the most eligible situation. And in answer to these  
was a Trustee of Williams College. The brethren who were so  
*' unanimously agreed " in the result of their deliberations, were  
its friends, and the place in which they held their meeting, and  
the towns and churches which they represented, were all, so far  
as mere local and personal considerations were concerned, in  
sympathy with it, so that there is no room for a suspicion even  
that they were influenced by hostility to that Institution. Indeed  
the most remarkable aspect of the whole transaction is that they  
were able to rise so far above all local and personal considera-  
in this first associated action, several other of the earliest and  
most efficient friends of Amherst College were residents of  
Franklin County. Rev. James Taylor of Sunderland was a  
member of the Corporation as it was first chosen and organized,  
a constant attendant of all its meetings so long as he lived, a  
wise counsellor and a firm supporter of the College in all the  
 
Graves, its indefatigable agent, and Nathaniel Smith, its most  
liberal' donor in those early days, were both members of Mr.  
Taylor's church, born in Sunderlaiid and residing there when  
the establishment of such an Institution first began to be  
agitated. Dea. Elisha Billings of Conway, an educated man  
of great zeal, wisdom and influence, threw them all into this  
enterprise, and contributed largely to its success. These three  
laymen who were all connected by blood or marriage, as well as  
kindred spirits in religious faith and zeal, often visited at each  
other's houses, particularly at the house of Dea. Billings in  
Conway, and Rev. Mr. Taylor and Rev. Mr. Packard not un-  
frequently visited with them. And " The College," at first  
strongly desired and then more distinctly contemplated and  
planned for, was the principal topic of their conversations and  
the object of their most fervent prayers for years before it  
came into actual existence. As foreign missions in America had  
their origin in the prayers of a few students at " the hay-  
stack " near Williams College, so Amherst College perhaps origi-  
nated in the prayers of this little circle of intelligent and de-  
voted Christians in Franklin County; and if the whole secret  
were known, cultivated, earnest, praying women would perhaps  
be found to have had quite as much to do with cherishing it in its  
germ as praying men. Mrs. Smith, who was a sister of Col.  
Graves, was like him in religious zeal, and faith, and prayer ;  
and Mrs. Billings, who was a daughter of Rev. John Storrs, of  
Mansfield, Conn., was so captivated with the history of the  
Francke Institution, at Halle, which was founded wholly in  
faith and prayer, 1 that she circulated among her friends, a  
little book containing that history, until it was entirely worn  
out.  
 
1 Like George Miiller's Orphan School, at Bristol, England, which was suggested  
by that at Halle; for George Miiller came from that part of Germany, and was  
early familiar with Francke's Institution. More's Charity School, at Mansfield,  
Conn., which afterwards grew into Dartmouth College, may also have exerted some  
influence on the origin of Amherst College, for Mrs. Billings was from Mansfield ;  
her mother was a More, and she is remembered to have spoken often with great  
interest of the More Charity School, together with Francke's Institution. I have  
these facts from Mrs. Russell, wife of Rev. E. Russell, D. D., of Randolph, and  
daughter of Dea. Billings. See also Dr. Hitchcock's Reminiscences of Araherst  
College, p. 7.  
 
Here the question naturally arises, why these friends of learn-  
ing and religion in Franklin County, should have preferred  
Hampshire County to their own, and why they should have  
selected Amherst rather than other towns in Hampshire County,  
as the site of such an Institution. In answer to these questions  
it should be observed in the first place, that Hampshire is the  
central county in Western Massachusetts, and in that part of  
the valley of the Connecticut which belongs to Massachusetts,  
and Ainherst is one of the most central towns in Hampshire  
County. Northampton was the shire town of the old county  
of Hampshire, when it comprehended the whole of Western  
Massachusetts, and, together with the neighboring towns, took a  
leading part in the early civil, political, and religious history of  
this part of the Commonwealth. The distinguished men who  
have given character and reputation to Western Massachusetts,  
and some of whose names have been recorded in the last chap-  
ter, were in large proportion residents of the central towns in  
Hampshire County. Hampshire County has long been the ban-  
ner county of the State in its educational and religious history ;  
statistics show that it exceeds any other county in the propor-  
tion, both of its College students and church members ; l and  
whether as cause or effect, or more likely both cause and effect  
of this, it is now equally distinguished for the number and char-  
acter of its higher educational Institutions.  
 
Amherst Academy, although it was not incorporated until  
1816, commenced operations in 1814, and was formally dedi-  
cated in 1815, the same year in which the Franklin Association  
so unanimously recommended Amherst as the most favorable  
situation for a College ; and the enterprise of the citizens of  
Amherst in raising the funds, the enthusiastic interest in its in-  
auguration manifested in bonfires, ringing of bells and a general  
hundred and twenty students in College, which was twice as many in proportion as  
the average of the State. It was then computed that if the whole State sent young  
men to College in the same proportion, she would have twelve hundred students  
 
of neighboring towns. Previous to the existence of the Acad-  
emy, also, Amherst had been distinguished by the superiority of  
its public and private schools. Such men as Judge Strong, Gen.  
Mattoon, Dr. Parsons, Dr. Coleman, Dr. Cutler, Noah Webster  
and Samuel Fowler Dickinson formed society and elevated the  
tone of public sentiment. In 1798, there were eleven students  
from Amherst at one time in College eight in Williams and  
three in other Colleges. In eleven years from 1792, Amherst  
furnished twelve graduates of Williams and Dartmouth, six from  
each ; and in the twelve years preceding the charter of the  
College, eighteen young men from this town were graduated at  
Williams, Dartmouth, Yale and Midcllebury. Even before the  
establishment of the College, Amherst, considering its compar-  
ative newness and small population, might well claim to be the  
banner town of the banner county in education.  
 
Dr. Dwight visited Amherst in 1803, ascended the tower of  
the church then standing on the site of the Woods Cabinet and  
Observatory, and was greatly struck with the beauty and pic-  
turesqueness of the scenery which have been admired and loved  
by so many generations of College students. " The position,"  
he says, " is a very eligible one, commanding a great multitude  
of the fine objects which are visible from the summit of Mount  
Holyoke. This amphitheatre is about twenty-four miles in length  
and about fifteen in breadth. The mountains by which it is en-  
circled and the varieties of scenery with which its area is filled  
up, form one of the most impressive and delightful objects which  
 
can be seen in this country A handsomer piece of ground  
 
"[than the township of Amherst,] composed of hills and valleys,  
is rarely seen, more elegant slopes never. The lines by which  
settlers, who settled all around it, and even took possession of  
the surrounding hills in preference to its rich alluvial bottoms.  
Ihose lands which are now among our choicest meadows and  
 
kno\vn as "Foote-Folly-Swamp," and Hadley Swamp was a not  
imfrequent designation for the whole territory. All the neigh-  
boring towns Hadley, Sunderland, South Hadley, Granby, Pel-  
ham and Shutesbury had been incorporated while Amherst still  
remained a precinct, or at most a district. Amherst was origi-  
nally a part of Hadley. It was called " the third precinct " of  
Hadley till 1754, the " second precinct " till 1759, and was not  
incorporated as a town till 1775. In 1810, the population waa  
1,469; in 1820, it was 1,917.  
 
At the center, the two principal streets, running the one north  
and south l and the other east and west, were both originally laid  
out, as in Hadley, forty rods wide, that is, more than twice the  
width of the present West street in Hadley, and afterwards re-  
duced to less than twenty rods at the widest. Thus the houses  
at the center were all originally built fronting on a wide common  
which \vas subsequently enclosed and became a part of the front  
yards of some of the ancient houses, though as new houses  
were built, they were usually built nearer the narrowed street.  
The lawn in front of the old Strong house in Amity street, for  
example, was once a part of the broad street or common, and  
shows the width of the original street. The old Dr. Cowles  
house represents in like manner the change in Pleasant street.  
At the commencement of the present century, Judge Strong  
owned all the land at and near the north-west and north-east  
corners of the two main streets, as far north as the Dr. Cowles  
house and the Dr. Coleman house 2 which then stood near the  
cemetery, and as far east as the Dr. Cutler house which then,  
stood on the brow of Sunset Hill, now Mrs. Jones'. Gen. Ze-  
bina Montague owned the south-east corner, and Dr. Parsons  
the whole south-west angle except the corner which was occu-  
pied then as it has been ever since by the hotel. In 1815, when  
ber 9, 1815, aged seventy-six. See funeral sermon preached by Rev. Nathan Per-  
kins of East Amherst, and published by request. Dr. Seth Coleman was the father  
of Rev. Lyman Coleman, D. D., some time principal of Amherst Academy and In-  
structor in Amherst College, the author of the well-known works on the Constitu-  
tion and History of the Early Christian Church, and now Professor in Lafayette  
College.  
 
the College began to be talked of there were still not more than  
twenty-five houses in the entire village. Three of these were  
gambrel-roofed houses the then aristocratic style viz., those  
of Judge Strong and Dr. Parsons, and the hotel, the last, how-  
ever, only one story, and then kept by Elijah Boltwood. Of  
these the Judge Strong house, now Mrs. Emerson's, is the  
only remaining specimen. Between the hotel and the Parsons  
house, 1 there was no building except a school-house near the  
site of the present tin-shop, which was used sometimes for a dis-  
trict school, and sometimes for a select school. There was no  
sidewalk, and the road (for a street it could hardly be called,  
although it was the main road leading to " the meeting-house,")  
was often so muddy as to be impassable. Prof. Snell remem-  
bers being obliged more than once, by reason of the mud, to  
betake himself to the Virginia fence that run its zigzags along-  
side this road, which was then nearly as crooked as the fence  
itself. The common was partly swamp and partly pasture  
ground, grown up to white birch, on which each family was  
allowed by annual vote of the town to pasture a cow so many  
weeks every season. On the east side there was a goose-pond,  
was then occupied by the house and store of H. Wright Strong.  
Till about this time this was the only store in town, and there  
was no such thing as a drug store, or carpenter's or blacksmith's  
shop in existence. At the east end of what is now Phenix Row  
was the house which was owned and occupied by Noah Webster  
for ten years from 1812 till 1822. This house was destroyed by  
fire in 1838. The orchard which Mr. Webster planted and  
cherished (now Foster Cook's,) is still perhaps the best orchard  
in town. Samuel Fowler Dickinson had recently erected the  
house now owned by his son, the first brick house in the vil-  
lage. The road between Mr. Webster's and Mr. Dickinson's  
then took a zigzag course towards the present residence of Mr.  
 
crosses the center of that swamp, and the village church is built  
on its margin.  
 
A boy was sent one morning on an errand from Dr. Parsons'  
to Esq. Dickinson's. As soon as he came upon the road lead-  
ing from Pelham to Northampton, he began to pick up silver  
dollars. On his return he went on down the same road, as far, as  
Dr. Cutler's, still picking up silver dollars. When he reached  
home, he counted out sixty silver dollars. At evening, Dea.  
Rankin of Pelham came in and claimed the money. He had  
set out in the morning, with the hard money in his saddle-bags,  
to pay for a yoke of oxen in Northampton. The saddle-bags,  
worn through, began to leak at Esq. Dickinson's, and by the  
time he reached Dr. Cutler's they were emptied of their con-  
tents, so that the deacon arrived at Northampton without any  
means of paying for his oxen. The boy passed over the road  
some hours later and picked up almost every dollar of the  
money. He is still living, and bears the name of David Par-  
sons. The story illustrates two characteristics of the good old  
times in Amherst first, how little passing there was in the  
streets, and secondly, the possession and common use of silver  
money. It was an intermediate period between the age of mod-  
ern " greenbacks " and the old " Continental currency." There  
was at this time only a weekly stage to Boston. It was not till  
some time after the College was established, that this was ex-  
changed for a tri-weekly, which was then counted a great  
advance. 1  
 
When Esq. Dickinson erected his brick house, he removed  
the wood house which he had previously occupied on the same  
site, to Pleasant street where it still stands, a small old-fashioned  
two-story house, a little north of the blacksmith shop. The  
old Whiting house, between Pleasant street and North street,  
now owned by Mr. Ayers, is also one of the antiquities of Am-  
herst. And the grand old elm which overshadows it like a  
protecting forest, if it were only gifted with speech like some  
 
1 A lady to whom I am much indebted for this sketch of Amherst as it was, remem-  
bers that the first ice-house, and also the first bathing apartment in Amherst, was  
built in 1816 ; the first Congress water was brought here in 1817, and the first cook-  
ing stove in 1819. As late as 1824, there was not an organ or piano in Amherst.  
 
trees of the mythical ages, could tell tales older and more im-  
pressive than all the history that has been gathered from the  
oldest inhabitants. There is no finer specimen of " the Amer-  
ican tree" "the tree of liberty" in the valley of the Con-  
necticut, and of course none anywhere else in the country or the  
world.  
 
There are two houses on the east side of the common which  
existed at the time of which we are speaking, and still remain  
quite unchanged the Warner house and the Merrill house.  
And we must not forget to mention an institution, quite charac-  
teristic of the good old times, which once stood on the back side  
of the Merrill lot, but which has passed from the knowledge of  
the present generation though some traces of it have been  
brought to light in recent excavations. We refer to a distillery  
the first, though by no means the last, in this region which  
used up some three thousand barrels of cider every year, turning  
it into cider-brandy, and used up as effectually some of the old  
settlers. Their children, who are still on the stage, recount some  
first lessons learned there, which, with the help of later lessons  
of a counter tendency, have made them ever since the sturdy  
friends of temperance. In the construction of Prof. Seelye's  
fish-pond lately, the aqueduct of logs which brought water into  
the distillery was discovered, and found to be still, after three-  
quarters of a century, in a state of perfect preservation. College  
street now runs along near the brow of this distillery ravine,  
and several of the Professors' houses occupy the very ground  
which used to be covered with barrels of cider and cider-brandy.  
Fact significant not only of change but of improvement ! The  
Revolution, chose a Committee of Correspondence in 1774 who  
wrote a spirited and outspoken letter of encouragement to the  
people of Boston, and a few days before the Declaration of In-  
dependence, voted to support Congress in such a declaration,  
pledging to that support their lives and fortunes. In 1777 they  
censured Rev. Mr. Parsons for lukewarmness in the cause. In  
 
was strongly opposed to the war of 1812, and made a public  
declaration of its opposition.  
 
Araherst was the birthplace of Silas Wright, Governor of  
New York and a prominent candidate for the Presidency at  
the time of his death. Gideon Lee, the wealthy and noble  
Mayor of New York city, and Chester Ashley, United States  
Senator from Arkansas, were also born here. Besides Simeon  
Strong, usually known as " Judge Strong," Judge of the Su-  
preme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, who died in office in  
1805, Amherst has given to the bench his son Solomon Strong,  
State Senator in Massachusetts four years, Member of Congress  
two terms, and Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, and  
Daniel Kellogg, Judge of the Supreme Court of Vermont.  
Among its lawyers Osrnyn Baker, Edward Dickinson and  
Charles Delano have been members of Congress. Of the min-  
isters born here, we may mention Dr. David Parsons, thirty-  
seven years pastor of the First Church in Amherst, Dr. Daniel  
Kellogg, almost fifty years pastor of the Congregational Church in  
Framingham, Austin Dickinson, editor of The National Preacher ^  
and originator of several philanthropic and Christian enterprises,  
and Rev. Dr. Nelson, lately of St. Louis, now of Lane Theolog-  
ical Seminary. The father of Henry Lyman, " the Martyr of  
Sumatra," removed here for the education of his son, and con-  
tinued to live here until his death, and the family made this  
their home till the children were educated and settled else-  
where. The house at the foot of Mount Pleasant, now Mr.  
Fearing's, was long known as " the Lyman house." It may also  
be associated with Gov. Wright, for it was built by his maternal  
grandfather. Mount Pleasant itself, where, in 1830, were gath-  
ered more than a hundred boys in that " Classical Institution,"  
which, founded by a graduate of the Class of '26, fitted for Col-  
lege Mr. Beecher, and some other distinguished pupils, and  
which Mr. Choate, in arguing here a famous reference in regard  
to it, so fitly styled " the jewel on the brow of Amherst," was  
then an unbroken forest famous only for the chestnuts which  
attracted the boys and the squirrels in flocks to the harvest.  
3 ; .~  
 
