CHAPTER III.  
 
AMHERST ACADEMY.  
 
AMHERST ACADEMY was the mother of Amherst College.  
The Trustees of the Academy were also Trustees of the Col-  
lege, and the records of the Academy were the records of the  
College during the first four years of its existence. Some ac-  
count of the Academy must, therefore, precede the history of  
the College. The founding and erecting of Amherst Academy,  
kept pace with the origin and progress of the last war with  
Great Britain. The subscription was started in 1812, when  
that war was declared ; the Academy went into operation in  
December, 1814, the same year and the same month in which  
the peace was signed ; and it was fully dedicated with illumina-  
tions and public rejoicings in 1815, when the return of peace  
was known and hailed with joy in this country, especially in  
New England. This synchronism is worthy of note, not as a  
mere accidental coincidence, but as illustrating the energy, reso-  
lution, and self-sacrificing spirit of the men who could raise  
such a sum of money and found such an Institution at the very  
time when the industry and enterprise of New England were  
oppressed as never before nor since, by a war which was pecu-  
liarly hostile to their industrial interests. The charter was not  
obtained, however, till 1816, having been delayed by opposition  
in Amherst, and in the neighboring towns, of the same kind  
and partly from the very same sources as that which the College  
encountered in later years.  
 
The subscription was started by Samuel Fowler Dickinson,  
and Hezekiah Wright Strong, Esquires, the same men to whom,  
beyond any other citizens of Amherst, the College afterwards  
owed its origin. Calvin Merrill of the village, and Justus Wil-  
 
liams of South Amherst, were also quite active in raising funds  
and rearing the building. Dr. Parsons gave the land on which  
the building was erected, lent all his influence to the raising of  
the money, and was the first, and, until the establishment of the  
College, the only President of its Board of Trustees, and, to say  
the least, one of its principal fathers and founders. The Trustees  
named in the act of incorporation were David Parsons, Na-  
than Perkins, Samuel F. Dickinson, Hezekiah W. Strong,  
Noah Webster, John Woodbridge, James Taylor, Nathaniel  
Smith, Josiah Dwight, Rufus Graves, Winthrop Bailey, Expe-  
rience Porter, and Elijah Gridley. In common with other  
incorporated institutions of the kind, the Academy received  
from the Legislature of the State, the grant of half a town-  
ship of land in the district of Maine, on condition that the in-  
the Academy was open to both sexes. The principal male  
teachers during this period, in their chronological order, were  
Francis Bascom, Joseph Estabrook, John L. Parkhurst, Gerard  
Hallock, Zenas Clapp, David Green, and Ebenezer S. Snell.  
Three of these were afterwards connected with the College as  
tutors or professors, one became the well-known editor and pro-  
prietor of The Journal of Commerce, and another an honored  
secretary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign  
Missions. The lady teachers were Lucy Douglas, afterwards  
Mrs. James Fowler of Westfield, Orra White, afterwards Mrs.  
Dr. Hitchcock, Mary Ann Field, afterwards Mrs. Henry Mer-  
rill, Sarah S. Strong, 1 daughter of H. W. Strong, now Mrs.  
teacher of remarkable brilliancy, I am indebted for many facts in the early his>  
tory of Amherst Academy, which but for her extraordinary memory must have  
perished with the fire that consumed the Records in 1838.  
 
State, and indeed the ladies' department was in advance of the  
same department in other institutions, as might be shown by a  
simple comparison of the studies pursued and text-books in  
use by the young ladies. Among these may be specified Chem-  
istry, which was then just beginning to be studied in schools  
outside of Colleges, but was taught in Amherst Academy with  
lectures and experiments by Prof. Graves who had been lec-  
turer on Chemistry in Dartmouth College, Rhetoric, Logic,  
History, Paley's Moral Philosophy, Play fair's Euclid, Stewart's  
Philosophy, Enfield's Natural Philosophy, Herschell's Astron-  
omy with the calculation and projection of eclipses, Latin,  
French, etc. On Wednesday afternoons all the scholars were  
assembled in the upper hall for reviews, declamations, composi-  
tions and exercises in reading in which both gentlemen and  
ladies participated. Spectators were admitted and were often  
present in large numbers, among whom Dr. Parsons and Mr.  
Webster, President and Vice-Presideiit of the Board of Trust-  
ees, might usually be seen, and often the lawyers, physicians,  
and other educated men of the place. Not unfrequently gen-  
tlemen from out of town were present, as for instance, Dr. Pack-  
ard, who early became a Trustee, and was much interested in  
the prosperity of the Institution. Once a year, at the close of  
the fall term in October, the old meeting-house was fitted up  
with a stage and strange to tell in the staid town of Amherst  
where dancing was tabooed and cards never dared show them-  
selves, reverend divines went with lawyers and doctors, and all  
the Academy and the College, (Rev. Nahum Gould of the Class  
of '25) while affording a glimpse of the former, reveals one  
secret, perhaps more than one, of the origin and prosperity of  
the latter :  
 
" I came to Amherst in the spring of 1819 and studied in  
preparation for College under the direction of Joseph Esta-  
brook and Gerard Hallock. The principal's salary was $800  
per annum, and Miss Sarah Strong's $20 a month. I found the  
 
there never was a people that took such deep interest in the  
welfare of students. None need leave on account of pecuniary  
embarrassments. Tuition was free to any pious student who  
was preparing for the gospel ministry. Board was one dollar a  
week, and if this could not be afforded, there were families  
ready to take students for little services which they might ren-  
der in their leisure hours. Their liberality was spoken of  
through the land, and it was an inducement to persons of lim-  
ited means, preparing for the ministry, to come to Amherst.  
To such the church prayer meeting in the village was a school  
as well as a place for devotion. Daniel A. Clark, the pastor,  
was greatly beloved by the students. Noah Webster resided  
here preparing his dictionary. He took an interest in the  
Academy and opened his doors for an occasional reception,  
which we prized very highly. Col. Graves was a successful  
agent for the Academy and a help to the students. Mr. Esta-  
brook was well qualified for his station. Mr. Hallock was a  
scholar and a gentleman. It was a pleasant task to manage a  
school where there were so many pious students seeking qualifi-  
cations for usefulness, who felt that they were in the right place  
and were establishing a Christian character of high standing."  
It is not surprising that such a school, under such auspices  
and influences, with such a standard of scholarship and Christian  
culture, flourished. It opened with more students than any  
other Academy in Western Massachusetts. It soon attracted  
pupils from every part of New England. It had at one time  
ninety pupils in the ladies' department, and quite as many, usually  
more, in the gentlemen's. It was the Williston Seminary and  
the Mount Holyoke of that day united. The founder of Mount  
Holyoke Seminary was a member of Amherst Academy in 1821.  
Her teacher, the lady principal, thus describes her : " The  
number of young ladies that term was ninety-two. Some had  
been teachers. They were of all ages, from nine to thirty-two,  
and from all parts of Massachusetts and the adjoining States.  
Among these pupils was one whose name is now famous in  
history. Then uncultivated in mind and manners, of large  
physique, twenty-three or twenty-four years of age, and receiv-  
ing her first impulse in education. She commenced with gram-  
 
mar and geography, and soon advanced to rhetoric and logic.  
Having a comprehensive mind and being very assiduous in her  
studies, she improved rapidly. Her name was Mary Lyon."  
 
The number of useful men whose names are " written in  
heaven," and not unknown on earth, who fitted for College and  
for business during this period in the history of Arnherst, was  
very great. And the reputation and success of the classical  
department became so remarkable, that partly to give fuller  
scope and perfection to this department, and partly to avoid  
some difficulties and some scandals which at length arose from  
educating the two sexes together, the female department was  
abolished, and the Academy, thus entered on the second period,  
and in some respects a new one in its history, in which it was  
mainly distinguished as a school, preparatory for College.  
 
During this second period, Elijah Paine, Solomon Maxwell,  
Story Hebard, Robert E. Pattisou, William P. Paine, William  
Thompson, Simeon Colton, William S. Tyler, Evangelinus Soph-  
ocles, Ebenezer Burgess, George C. Partridge, Nahum Gale,  
and Lyman Coleman, were among the principal or assistant  
teachers. At this time, there were usually from seventy-five  
to one hundred students in the classical department, and in  
the first year of Mr. Colton's administration, the writer, who  
was his assistant, well remembers that we sent about thirty to  
College, the larger part of whom entered at Amherst. Prior to  
the existence of Williston Seminary, and during the depression  
of Phillips Academy at Andover, in the declining years of  
Principal Adams, if not still earlier, Amherst Academy, without  
tablishment of Williston Seminary and the rise of Normal  
schools and High schools in all the large towns gradually drew  
off their students and thus their support from Amherst, and  
other comparatively unendowed Academies, till one after an-  
other of them became extinct. And although the Academy  
at Amherst sustained itself longer and better than many others,  
 
government and instruction of some quite superior teachers who  
have since become distinguished educators, yet it became more  
and more a merely local institution for the children of the town,  
and was at length superseded by our excellent High school. The  
building which was a large three story edifice of brick occupying  
one of the most beautiful sites in the centre of the village, and  
which was hallowed in the memory of so many hundreds and thou-  
sands, as not only the place where they received their education,  
but also as the place where the first meetings for prayer and  
conference in the village, and all the social religious meetings of  
the village church, were held for many years, this venerable  
and sacred edifice was taken down in the summer of 1868,  
to make way for the Grammar school, west of the hotel, which  
now occupies the site. Amherst Academy did a great and  
good work in and of itself for which many who were educated  
there and not a few who were spiritually "born there," will  
bless God forever. But the best work which it did and which,  
it is believed, will perpetuate its memory and its influence, was  
the founding of Amherst College.  
 
