CHAPTER XXV.  
 
BENEFACTORS OF THE COLLEGE.  
 
THE earliest pecuniary benefactors of the College were the  
subscribers to the Charity Fund. Their names are preserved  
the neighboring towns, who furnished the materials, prepared  
the grounds, laid the foundations and built up the superstruct-  
ure of the first College edifice. These are too numerous to be  
named, or even remembered. But there is " a book of remem-  
brance " in which the names, at least of those who contributed  
to this truly Christian object, from truly benevolent and Chris-  
tian motives, are all entered, and none of them will be forgotten.  
 
Then follow the men, women and children, not a few of them  
members of sewing societies and cent associations, who furnished  
the rooms, and made up, for the most part in small sums, the  
thirty thousand dollar subscription in the days of President  
Moore. Their subscriptions of a dollar a year, perhaps, or a few  
cents a year for five years, were ridiculed by the enemies of the  
Institution, in the Legislature, and in the newspapers. 1 But the  
Master was looking on as they " cast their gifts into the treasury,"  
and as he saw them casting in their two mites, perchance he said :  
" This poor widow, this little child hath cast in more than they  
all." No College in the land, perhaps none in the world, has re-  
ceived so many gifts of this kind as Amherst, and according to  
the same arithmetic, the arithmetic taught by the Great Master,  
Amherst is thus richer than any other College.  
 
1 Specimens, both of the subscriptions, and of the ridicule, may be seen in the  
 
The first individual founder of a permanent fund for the bene-  
fit of Amherst College, was the first President, Dr. Moore. He  
provided in his will, that after the decease of Mrs. Moore, and  
with her consent and joint action, what remained of his property  
should constitute a fund, like the Charity Fund, in aid of indi-  
gent students, the incumbents of the charity to be nominated by  
the North Brookfield Association. The fund, reckoned at about  
five thousand dollars at the time of his death, and rather in-  
creased than diminished during the life of Mrs. Moore, is now  
worth nearly ten thousand dollars, and inasmuch as one-third  
of the income is to be perpetually added to the principal, it is  
destined to become a foundation of immense value in future ages.  
 
The Stimson Fund comes next in order of time, and is de-  
voted to the same purpose as the Moore and the Charity Fund.  
The income, however, is all expended as it accrues, instead of be-  
ing partly added to the principal. The bequest was made in the  
latter half of Dr. Humphrey's presidency, in the language of the  
testator, " to the College in Amherst of which Rev. Heman  
Humphrey, D. D., is President ; " and it is the only considerable  
bequest that was made during his administration. And this  
was given in aid of poor students not directly to relieve the  
poor College from its embarrassments. Yet his sympathies  
seem to have been enlisted in behalf of the College by the re-  
peated refusals of the Legislature to listen to its repeated cries  
for help ; and in 1837 he made his will bequeathing the real  
estate in Eliot street, including the house in which his father  
lived and in which he was born, to aid the College in its work  
of " educating indigent students for the Gospel Ministry." Ca-  
leb Stimson, the author of this bequest, was the son of Jeremiah  
and Sarah Stimson, and was born in Boston, May 6, 1770. Little  
can now be ascertained of his personal history. His wife, Abi-  
gail Morton of Milton, died many years before him. They had  
no children. I have not been able to learn even the date of his  
death. But it occurred not long after the will was made. Dur-  
ing the life-time of a brother and a nephew, for whom he made pro-  
vision, an annuity, only, of two hundred dollars, was paid to the  
College. In 1852, the property came fully into the possession of  
 
The income, appropriated in the same general way as that of the  
Charity Fund, but administered by the Trustees, instead of the  
Overseers, and subject to fewer restrictions, has proved an aux-  
iliary of great value in the accomplishment of the end for which  
Amherst College was originally established. Mr. Stimson was  
an Episcopalian, and a member of Grace Church in Boston.  
 
The earliest donor of any very large amount of money was  
that country banker, that wise counselor, that devoted friend  
of education, religion, missions and every good cause, Nathaniel  
Smith of Sunderland of whom a brief biography lias already been  
given. l He gave nothing for permanent foundations the day  
for these great lights, the fourth day, had not yet come. He  
never gave large sums at a time, but he was continually giving  
to meet the exigences and the current expenses of the Institu-  
tion, till his donations amounted to the then munificent aggre-  
gate of twelve thousand dollars.  
 
Next to him came the city merchant, born in Northampton,  
but for the greater part of his business life resident in Boston,  
the uncompromising enemy of alcohol and tobacco, the Chris-  
tian philanthropist who loved every human being and hated noth-  
ing but sin and its incorrigible authors and causes, John Tappan,  
who began his donations to Amherst College in the first decade  
of its history and continued them to the last, and who would  
have given more if his life had been spared another year. The  
greater number of his donations were given as they were needed  
for the increase of the library and the cabinets. But the Sam-  
uel Green Professorship which he insisted on calling, not by his  
own name, but by that of his honored and beloved pastor, attests  
his appreciation also of permanent foundations for educational  
purposes. He must have given Amherst College in all, not less  
than twenty-five thousand dollars.  
 
At a special meeting of the Corporation, held at Worcester,  
June 19, 1844 the same meeting at which President Humphrey  
tendered his resignation a letter dated Boston, June 16, 1844,  
was received from Hon. David Sears, in which he proposes, if  
 
a certain sum of money, in order to establish a Permanent Fund,  
to be called the Sears Fund of Literature and Benevolence.  
Whereupon they voted " to accept the generous and munificent  
donation to the Trustees of Amherst College, presented by Hon.  
David Sears of Boston, through Hon. Samuel T. Armstrong,  
and that Mr. Armstrong be requested to express to the liberal  
donor the gratitude and thanks of this Board." Thus was es-  
tablished the first permanent fund for general purposes a fund  
so unique in its conception as to be a curiosity, so far-seeing in  
its provisions and so vast in its prospective accumulations that,  
if the plan is carried out, it must always be one of tJTe richest  
a piece of land at the corner of Leverett and Barton streets in  
Boston, valued at the time of the donation at five thousand dol-  
lars, and yielding an annual rental of one hundred and twenty  
dollars until the expiration of the lease in 1928. Until that time  
this annual rent of the leasehold is to be " expended in the an-  
nual purchase of books of general literature, to create and in-  
crease a library appurtenant to the fund and for the use and  
benefit of the students of Amherst College under the regula-  
tions and guardianship of the officers of the Institution."  
 
The fee of the land is also transferred to the College, and  
after the expiration of the lease in 1928, one-half of the annual  
income of it may be expended for " such purposes of literature  
without restriction as they (the Trustees) deem most desirable,  
including a right to build at their pleasure for the use of said  
fund." The other half of the annual income, together with  
any part of the first half not so expended, must be invested and  
added to the principal annually, between the months of July  
and January, to form a new permanent capital, provided, how-  
ever, that the donor or his representatives do not exercise the  
right which is reserved to them, of demanding for his or their  
 
In order to give immediate activity to this fund, Mr. Sears, at  
the same time, gave to the Trustees the additional sum of five  
thousand dollars in money which was to be invested, and the  
annual income to be applied in the manner above described, that  
is, one-half to be expended for purposes of literature at the dis-  
of land in Brattle street, Boston, together with the buildings on  
it, " for the purpose of placing upon a broader basis and increas-  
ing the importance of the Sears Foundation of Literature and  
Benevolence." The annual rent of this estate, already leased  
till 1919, and the annual income of the same after the expiration  
of the lease, are to be collected by the Trustees, and expended  
subject to the same rules and limitations as the income of the  
previous donations. No estimate is given of the value of this  
property. Dr. Hitchcock, in his " Reminiscences," estimates  
it, I know not on what authority, at twelve thousand dollars. 1  
The yearly rent, under the present lease, is " fourteen ounces,  
eight pennyweights and eighteen grains of pure gold ; or two  
hundred and sixteen ounces and two grains of pure silver in  
coins of the United States of America, on the premises to be  
delivered, in four equal and quarter-yearly payments." This  
unique rent, specified in the " Indenture between David Sears  
and David Hinckley " made in 1819 to last one hundred years,  
was once resisted, tested in the courts and sustained as legal  
and collectible by law.  
 
The present annual income of these several donations is some  
two thousand three hundred dollars, and the present accumu-  
lated principal, or cash capital, is a little short of twenty-five  
thousand dollars. What this fund will become, if it goes on ac-  
cumulating according to the founder's plan through all coming  
time, it were easier to imagine than to calculate. Some sugges-  
tion of what the founder intended and expected it to become,  
 
of the original fund, and the investments of the increase of the  
Leverett street estate, and the investments of the income of this  
present estate (the Brattle street) that an accumulated fund or  
capital shall be formed amounting to one hundred thousand dol-  
lars ; then fifty thousand dollars thereof shall be set apart there-  
from to constitute a new capital stock, or fund, and as often,  
after the first accumulation and setting apart of a new capital  
stock or fund as aforesaid, said original fund and the remainder  
of its increase shall have formed an accumulated fund or capital  
amounting to one hundred thousand dollars, then the one-half  
part thereof shall again constitute another new capita? stock or  
fund, and may and shall be set apart as aforesaid : and so, toties  
quoties, through all time, as often as the accumulations of the  
increased original fund shall amount to one hundred thousand  
ing a new Library building (the shelves of the present Library be-  
ing already filled), Mr. Sears made another donation of five thou-  
sand dollars to aid the Trustees in carrying out his original design  
of a Library appurtenant to the Sears Fund, and accompanied  
the donation with some suggestions touching the plan for such a  
building. As this effort did not succeed, Mr. Sears' donation,  
with the consent of the donor, was invested that it might accu-  
mulate until such time as the Trustees may be able to erect the  
contemplated Library building. This fund now amounts to eight  
thousand dollars. The cash capital resulting from these several  
donations of Mr. Sears, aside from the now greatly increased  
and constantly increasing value of the real estate donated, al-  
ready amounts to about thirty-three thousand dollars.  
 
David Sears, the founder of this munificent foundation of  
literature and benevolence, was born in Boston on the 8th  
of October, 1787. His father, David Sears, was " an eminent  
merchant and excellent citizen " of the literary and commercial  
metropolis of New England. His mother, Ann Winthrop Sears,  
was a lineal descendant in the fifth generation, of John Win-  
throp, the first Governor of Massachusetts. After receiving the  
 
Sears, Jr., entered the University at Cambridge at sixteen years  
of age and graduated with the Class of 1807. The tenor of his  
life after graduation, his charities and public services can not be  
better described than in the language of Hon. Robert C. Win-  
throp, President of the Massachusetts Historical Society, of  
which Mr. Sears was a member and patron. 1 " The only son  
of a rich father was not likely to engage very earnestly either  
in business pursuits or professional studies ; and after a brief  
course of legal reading, Mr. Sears married a daughter of the  
late Hon. Jonathan Mason, and proceeded to make a tour in  
Europe. The sudden death of his father devolved upon him,  
in 1816, the care of as large an estate as, probably, had passed  
into the possession of a single hand in New England. And thus  
before he was quite thirty years of age, Mr. Sears was called to  
assume that responsible position among the very richest men of  
our city, which he has continued to hold for more than half a  
century.  
 
" Building for himself a costly and elegant mansion, fit for  
the exercise of those generous hospitalities which belong to  
wealth, he began early also to make plans for doing his share in  
those acts of public and private beneficence, which are the best  
part of every rich man's life. As early as 1821, a donation was  
made by him to St. Paul's Church, in this city, with whose con-  
gregation he was then associated, which has resulted in their  
possession of a valuable library, a site for their lecture room and  
a considerable fund for charitable purposes ; and this was fol-  
lowed, in succeeding years, by various provisions for other re-  
ligious, literary and charitable objects, which, while accomplish-  
his cost, gave the first encouragement to an establishment which  
has since been munificently endowed by others, and to whose  
permanent funds he was also a handsome contributor.  
 
" A stately chapel on the crowning ridge of yonder village of  
Longwood after the design of the church of his paternal  
ancestors in old England for which he had carefully prepared  
a form of service in correspondence with the peculiar views of  
his later life, and beneath which he had caused vaults to be con-  
structed for the last resting-places of himself and those most  
dear to him, will stand as a monument of his aspirations after  
Christian union.  
 
" A spacious block of houses not far from it, destined ulti-  
mately for the dwellings of such as have seen better days, and  
an accumulating fund under the control of the -"Overseers  
of the Poor of Boston, which has already added not a little to  
the comfort and support of a large number of poor women, the  
two involving already an amount of hardly less than ninety thou-  
sand dollars, will bear testimony to his thoughtful and well  
considered benevolence.  
 
" We may not forget that our own society owes to him the  
foundation of our little Historical Trust Fund, which, it was his  
willing to accept, and had served his fellow-citizens acceptably  
as a senator in our State Legislature ; as an overseer of the  
University ; and as a member of the Electoral College at the  
very last Presidential election. He had occasionally mingled in  
the public discussions of the day, and an elaborate letter which  
he addressed to the late John Quincy Adams, on the best mode  
of abolishing slavery, while that was still a living question, will  
be particularly remembered among his contributions to the  
press. Living to the advanced age of eighty-four it was only  
during the last year that his familiar form has been missing from  
the daily walks of our citizens. He will long be remembered by  
all who have known him, as one of those courteous and dignified  
 
years. Invitations were often extended to him to visit Amherst,  
but he never was in the place and never saw the College of  
which he was so liberal a benefactor. This, together with the  
fact that his religious opinions and his church connections dif-  
fered from those of the founders and most of the friends of the  
College, make his donations quite remarkable. It is understood  
that his sympathies were enlisted by the self-denials and sacri-  
fices of the Faculty at the time when they were struggling des-  
perately to sustain the heavy burden of pecuniary embarrass-  
ments. He often spoke of their " devotion and self-denials " in  
his conversation with the friends of the College, and in his letter  
to President Hitchcock, read at the dedication of the New Cab-  
inet and Observatory, he expresses fully and warmly his admi-  
ration of their spirit while at the same time he pays a sensible  
and just tribute to the Colleges of Massachusetts as the sources  
of very much of the honest principle and integrity of character  
that exist among us. This letter was introduced by the Presi-  
dent as follows : " In the Astronomical Observatory at Cam-  
bridge is a massive tower, built solid of Quincy granite, called  
the Sears Tower, which sustains one of the most splendid tele-  
scopes in the world. But in the Sears Foundation of Litera-  
ture and Benevolence in Amherst College, we have a more  
enduring structure : monumentum aere perennius : imo vero,  
etiam Saxo perennius."  
 
The names of four men, of widely different character, pur-  
suits and walks of life, are associated with the cluster of build-  
ings that crown the eminence in front of the Colleges, viz., the  
Woods Cabinet, the Lawrence Observatory, the Dickinson Nin-  
eveh Gallery, and the Sweetser Lecture Room. l We have  
already spoken of Mr. Woods and Mr. Sweetser in their official  
relation to the College, the former as Overseer, and the latter  
as Commissioner of the Charity Fund.  
 
Hon. Abbott Lawrence did not give a large sum to the "Col-  
lege, and in that respect would hardly be named among the  
principal donors. But the time and circumstances of the dona-  
tion which have been narrated elsewhere, and the character and  
 
1 In deference to Mr. Sweetser's wishes, the last is usually designated only as  
the Geological Lecture Room.  
 
influence of the donor, gave it an inestimable value. Born in  
Groton, Mass., December 16, 1792, educated only in the district  
school and in the Academy which now bears his name, coming  
to Boston in 1808, as an apprentice to his elder brother, Amos,  
" bringing his bundle under his arm and with less than three  
dollars in his pocket," he formed with him in 1814 the house of  
A. & A. Lawrence which for so many years took the lead both  
in the importation and the manufacture of cotton and woolen  
goods, and whose name is identified with Lowell and Lawrence.  
A member of Congress in 1834-5, and again in 1839-40, one  
of the Commissioners for the negotiation of the A shbiff ton- Web-  
ster treaty which settled the North-eastern boundary difficulty  
in 1842, one of the Electors at large of the State of Massachu-  
setts in the presidential election in 1844, wanting but six votes  
of being nominated for the vice-presidency with Gen. Taylor  
in the canvass of 1848, representative of the United States at  
the court of Great Britain from 1849 till 1852, he died August  
18, 1855, in the sixty-third year of his age, leaving behind him  
a rare reputation for the wisdom and integrity of his public and  
private life. " His subscriptions for public objects of charity or  
education were always on the most liberal scale ; but the crown-  
ing act of this character was the establishment of the Lawrence  
Scientific School at Cambridge, connected with Harvard College,  
for which he gave fifty thousand dollars in 1847, and left a fur-  
ther like sum by his will. He left a further sum of fifty thou-  
sand dollars for the purpose of erecting model lodging-houses,  
Nineveh Gallery, was born in Amherst, in the same house in  
which he died, October 23, 1785. He had no other early educa-  
tion than that which he obtained in the common schools, then  
very imperfect, of his native town. Baptized in infancy by  
Rev. Dr. Parsons, the pastor of the First Church in Amherst,  
he became a member of that church in March, 1816, when he  
was thirty years of age. He was one of the founders of the  
 
1 Hon. Nathan Appleton in a memoir prepared for the Massachusetts Historical  
 
church in South Amherst in 1824 and established a fund for its  
support. A model citizen, he attended every town meeting for  
sixty-two years till his death. Although he was slow of speech,  
and spoke seldom at such meetings, whenever he did speak, he  
was listened to with marked attention, and his wisdom and  
weight of character gave great weight to his words. He served  
the town more than once as selectman, and once at least repre-  
sented it in the General Court. The military title by which he  
was always called, was given him in the war of 1812, when he  
received a commission as Lieutenant in the army, and went with  
a company, raised in this part of the State, to protect Boston  
from an apprehended attack.  
 
Having no children he devoted, especially in his later years,  
the entire income of the handsome property which he had ac-  
quired by industry and thrift, to charitable and benevolent  
objects. The church, the poor, the benevolent societies, and  
the literary institutions of the town and the vicinity, shared  
freely in his bounty. Poor students were continually going to  
him for aid in obtaining an education, and worthy students sel-  
dom went in vain. It was a pleasure to ask him for charitable  
assistance it was only necessary to state the case, and if it was  
a good one, the assistance was sure to come. Amherst Acad-  
emy, Amherst College and Mount Holyoke Seminary, all found  
in him a friend and a helper. He was one of the first who drew  
building materials for the first College edifice; and his contri-  
butions were continued occasionally in larger or smaller sums  
ever afterwards. He gave to the Library and to the Cabinets,  
as well as to the Nineveh Gallery. He provided by his will for  
a perpetual scholarship which bears his name. He died January  
14, 1807, in the eighty-fifth year of his age. The commemora-  
tive addresses delivered at his funeral on the 18th of January  
by his pastor, Rev. George Lyman and President Stearns, were  
printed, and none who read them, still less any who have known  
him, can doubt that his was a rare and truly noble character  
and life. Tall, erect, hale, hearty, the living impersonation of  
honesty and modesty, combined with unbending firmness and  
unerring common sense, although a plain farmer, he was one of  
 
men, controlled by Christian principles, and in furnishing the  
means for erecting the Nineveh Gallery, he was actuated not a  
little by the consideration that the site was that of the old church  
where he was baptized and made a profession of his faith in  
Christ.  
 
Samuel Appleton, Esq., the founder of the Appleton Ichnologi-  
cal Cabinet, was born at New Ipswich, N. H., June 26, 1766.  
His family was of great respectability and influence both in New  
England, and in Suffolk County, old England, where his ances-  
tors had held estates for many generations. His grandfather,  
Isaac Appleton, was one of the original proprietors an$ settlers  
of New Ipswich by a grant from the General Court ; and his  
father, who also bore the name of Isaac, was a man of integrity  
and piety and a deacon of the church in that place. The dis-  
trict school of his native town was the only seminary of learning  
which he ever had an opportunity to attend, and this only for a  
limited portion of the year, till he was sixteen. At this early  
age, intent on becoming a merchant, he left Ipswich for Concord  
on foot with a small bundle of clothes and fifty cents in cash,  
and finding a place in a store, remained there four months, giv-  
ing good satisfaction. But at the end of that time the situation  
was wanted for a nephew of the merchant's wife, and young  
Appleton returned home, much to his own disappointment as  
well as that of his father and mother. He now remained at  
home four or five years assisting his father on the farm in the  
summer, and teaching a district school in his own or some neigh-  
boring town, in the winter. The next three summers, when he  
was between twenty-two and twenty-five, he spent partly as  
agent and partly as pioneer in the forests of Maine at a place  
where there was then no public worship within twenty miles,  
but where nearly sixty years afterwards he presented a bell for a  
meeting-house, and the town now bears the name, "Appleton."  
 
After some brief experiments in trade at Ashburnham and  
in New Ipswich, in 1794, he commenced business in Boston ; in  
1799 he formed a partnership with his brother Nathan, under  
the firm of S. & N. Appleton, and made his first voyage to Eu-  
 
business of the firm. The firm also engaged largely in manu-  
facturing, and contributed much to the building up of Waltham,  
and passed the remainder of his life in the enjoyment and use  
of his large fortune. Alike just and generous, he was never  
weary of lending a helping hand to relations and friends, to the  
acquaintances of his early life, to the poor and to all who needed  
either charity or aid and encouragement to business. He fos-  
tered with a liberal hand the institutions and interests of his  
native town ; and the Academy at New Ipswich, placed on a  
permanent foundation by funds which were largely his gift, will  
stand as a lasting memorial alike of his benevolence and of his  
love to the spot where he was born. He made it a rule during  
the last years of his life, to dispose of his whole large income  
for benevolent and public uses.  
 
Mr. Appleton died in Boston, July 12, 1853, in the eighty-  
eighth year of his age. " Not only in Boston but throughout  
New England, his name as a benefactor, sometimes munificent,  
always large, is inseparably connected with innumerable institu-  
tions to promote education, to advance learning, to uphold re-  
ligion, to relieve the wants and woes of suffering humanity. By  
his will, after making the most ample provision for Mrs. Apple-  
ton, and for a large circle of kindred, by special legacies, he be-  
queathed in trust to his executors stocks to the amount, in par  
value, of two hundred thousand dollars, ' to be by them applied,  
disposed of and distributed for scientific, literary, religious and  
charitable purposes. ' " l These executors, one of whom was  
Hon. Nathan Appleton, the brother of the testator, on the writ-  
ten application of President Hitchcock, made a grant of ten  
thousand dollars for the erection of a building at Amherst for  
scientific purposes, which will long stand as a worthy monument  
of the large-hearted benefactor whose name it bears.  
 
1 See Memoir of Samuel Appleton, Esq., in proceedings of Massachusetts His-  
torical Society, 1855-8, by Rev. Samuel K. Lothrop, D. D., who prefaces the Me-  
 
Hon. Jonathan Phillips was born in Boston, April 24, 1778.  
He belonged to that family whose names have been perpetuated  
as the founders and benefactors of the two Phillips Academies,  
being the grandson of Rev. Samuel Phillips who was settled in  
Andover sixty years, and the son of Lieut.-Gov. William Phil-  
lips, deacon of the Old South Church in Boston, whose charities  
during the latter part of his life averaged ten thousand dollars a  
year and who, besides numerous legacies to the benevolent soci-  
eties, left several bequests for the Academy and the Theological  
Seminary at Andover. Educated in the public schools of Bos-  
ton, in early life he engaged with his brother Edward in mer-  
cantile pursuits in that city, which, however, he soon relin-  
quished, finding ample employment in the care and proper expen-  
diture of his ample fortune. His private charities were numer-  
ous and liberal. He was one of the early founders and donors  
of the Boston Public Library. The chime of bells on the church  
of the late Dr. Gannet in Arlington street, Boston, was his gift.  
He was an intimate friend of Dr. William E. Channing with  
whose religious views he sympathized. Yet like the Lawrences  
and the Appletons he extended his charities to objects and in-  
stitutions that were under orthodox influence. Although he  
did not receive a public education, his only College degree being  
that of Master of Arts conferred on him at Cambridge in 1818,  
he appreciated the value of Colleges and College men, contrib-  
uted generously as we have seen elsewhere, to extend the trav-  
els of President Hitchcock in Europe, was one of the most lib-  
eral subscribers to the building and furnishing of our new Li-  
brary, arid left a legacy of five thousand dollars to be expended  
at the discretion of the Trustees in the purchase of books for its  
increase. He died in 1860 in the seventy-third year of his age.  
 
Among the many benefactors merchants, manufacturers,  
farmers and men of various occupations and professions who  
have contributed to the funds of Amherst College, we find an  
architect who builded so well in wood and stone, that he had  
ample means to aid in the building of more enduring structures.  
Richard Bond, Esq., the son of a farmer in Conway, where he  
was born March 5, 1798, was drawn to the study of architecture  
 
ampton whose grand and graceful proportions, the design of the  
late Charles Bulfinch of Boston, he had spent hours in gazing at  
while he was yet working on his father's farm in his native place.  
Soon after attaining to his majority, he went to Boston where, af-  
ter two or three years, he established himself, as a carpenter. In  
1845, he visited Europe for improvement in architecture. Many  
churches in Boston and in the interior of New England were  
planned by him and built under his superintendence, among  
others those of the Central Church, then on Winter street, and  
Mount Vernon on Ashburton Place. Under his design, the first ar-  
rangement of pews in an elliptical form was introduced into New  
England, that of the Central Church being the pioneer in 1840.  
 
He was a member of the Eliot Church in Roxbury, and was  
interested in all the religious and educational objects of the day.  
At his death, August 6, 1861, (his six children having prece-  
ded him to the grave, three in childhood, and three at adult  
age,) he left the income of half of his estate, estimated at about  
one hundred thousand dollars, to his wife during her life, and at  
her decease to educational objects ; the other half he gave to For-  
eign Missions and kindred institutions, thus devoting his whole  
property to the purposes of education and religion. He gave  
his library, containing many valuable works in architecture, to  
the Library at Amherst, and made the College his residuary leg-  
atee, anticipating that at least ten thousand dollars would thus  
come into 1 the general treasury. 1  
 
William F. Stearns to whose liberality we are indebted for the  
College Church, is the oldest son of President Stearns. He was  
born at Cambridgeport, November 9, 1834, and was, therefore,  
in 1864 when he made his donation, only thirty years of age.  
His education was entirely in the public schools and the High  
School in his native place, which, owing in no small measure to  
the wise supervision and fostering care of his father, had at-  
tained to rare excellence. With a predilection for business and  
a spirit of enterprise and independence by which he has always  
been distinguished, when he was eighteen, he went into Boston  
afoot and alone in search of a situation, and after several days'  
 
1 The depression of real estate during the Rebellion reduced the amount consid-  
erably below his expectations.  
 
seeking, having found a place in the shipping business on one  
of the principal wharves, he continued for some time to go back  
and forth daily, on foot, lodging, breakfasting and supping at  
home, taking his dinner with him, and carrying in his pocket  
the omnibus tickets which had been given him by his father.  
After three or four years of training and experience in the store  
and the office, he went as supercargo in a ship of his employers  
on a voyage to South America. He was but little more than  
twenty-one years of age, when he went out to India, first to  
Calcutta, and thence, after a few months, to Bombay. He went  
out with assurances from several Boston merchants, tlist they  
would make purchases through his agency, giving him a com-  
mission. Scarcely, however, had he reached Bombay, when the  
financial pressure and panic of 1857 made these promises of no  
avail, and left him, without any support from America, to find  
or create a business for himself. He soon won the confidence  
of a leading native merchant who wished to take him into part-  
nership. But Mr. Stearns was unwilling to belong to a firm  
that did business on the Sabbath, and he relinquished the tempt-  
ing opportunity. Falling in ere long with another young man  
from Boston of like spirit and circumstances with himself, he  
soon established the firm of Stearns & Hobart, which carried on  
a large and successful business in cotton and East India goods,  
chiefly with London. Meanwhile Mr. Stearns became the ruling  
spirit of a new Transportation Company for the transportation  
of merchandise by steamer through the Red Sea and by railway  
through Egypt. In order to facilitate this business, he visited  
Cairo, gained the confidence of the Pasha of Egypt, succeeded  
where the best diplomacy of English merchants and consuls had  
failed, in negotiating a new and far more favorable tariff of  
freights on the railway ; and before the close of the American  
war and the consequent sudden collapse of the cotton trade in  
the East, he was fast turning the commerce between Bombay  
and London into this channel, and thus anticipating the effect  
of the Suez canal in the quick transportation of merchandise  
from India to southern and western Europe. Consecrating his  
property and influence from the first to humanity and religion,  
in India he was the steadfast friend of the missionaries, and the  
 
strenuous advocate of Christianity among the Parsees and the  
Brahmins, the wealthy and cultivated classes. Deeply interested  
in the principles and issues of the American war, he encouraged  
enlistments in Cambridge and Amherst by a liberal addition to  
the bounties of the soldiers. Shortly before the conclusion of  
the war fortunately for himself and for the College, for the  
close of the war crippled his resources he set apart as many  
thousand dollars as he had then seen years, to the building of  
the College Church. He declined to give it his name. But  
rarely has a young man reared a nobler monument. Of unsur-  
passed beauty both in itself and in its situation, this building  
is destined to become I will not say a new center for a new  
cluster of edifices crowning and compassing the eastern brow of  
College Hill, as the old chapel is the arx of the cluster on the  
western citadel but I will say, another focus of the ellipse or  
quadrangle of edifices that will one day, doubtless, enclose, and  
perhaps fill, the entire College campus, and that too, probably, en-  
larged beyond even its now extended area ; and it is likely to be  
the center and seat of a moral and Christian influence of which  
such a structure in such a situation is the appropriate index.  
 
Moses Harrison Baldwin was .born in Palmer, Mass., January  
7, 1811, and died in Pawtucket, R. L, January 23, 1862, aged  
fifty-one. His father, John Baldwin, was a graduate of Dart-  
mouth College, and his father was Rev. Moses Baldwin of Pal-  
mer, Mass., a graduate at Princeton, N. J. His mother was the  
daughter of Rev. Nehemiah Williams of Brimfield, who was  
the son of Rev. Chester Williams of Hadley, who was the sou  
of Rev. Ebenezer Williams, the first minister of Pomfret, Conn.  
Moses H., was the tenth in a family of fifteen children, who,  
although none of them became ministers, seem to have inher-  
ited in large measure the temporal and spiritual blessings which  
have so often descended to the children and children's children  
of New England ministers. 1 In 1829, he entered the Freshman  
Class (the Class of '33) in Amherst College, but in conse-  
 
mercantile business in New York. After seven or eight years,  
continued ill health necessitated his retirement from active busi-  
ness. He now traveled, visiting Europe, the West Indies and  
the Southern States, and passed the remainder of his life in the  
care of the property which he had already acquired, and in do-  
ing good with the income which accrued from year to year. Be-  
sides' a liberal subscription to the Library, he bequeathed to the  
College about seven thousand dollars in his will. His partners,  
John C. Baldwin and Alonzo Lilly, also gave the College about  
four thousand dollars. The charities of Moses H. Baldwin, by  
will and otherwise, in the last year of his life, amounted, to fifty  
thousand dollars. It is said that his brother John C., who had  
no children, gave away a million of dollars in the last three or  
four years of his life. He gave large sums to different Colleges  
in New England and the West. The former became a member  
of the church in Brimfield under the ministry of Rev. Mr. Vaill ,  
and it was probably more or less under the influence of that  
life-long friend of Amherst College that he came to Amherst  
from Brimfield in 1829, and that he afterwards became one of  
its pecuniary benefactors.  
 
Hon. George Henry Gilbert, whose name has been given to  
the Museum of Indian Relics, and who has also been a liberal  
donor to the Library, was born in Brooklyn, Conn., February  
15, 1806. He was a lineal descendant of Sir John Gilbert who  
came to this country in 1638. With limited education and no  
capital, he worked as a machinist for some years in Worcester.  
Gaining the confidence of employers and business men by his in-  
dustry, skill and integrity, and by his capacity drawing the capi-  
tal which he needed, in 1833 he established himself in business  
and opened a machine shop in Andover, which is now the larg-  
est of the kind in the country. In 1841, he removed to Ware  
success in the fabrication of opera flannels this production completely excluding  
the French goods which had formerly occupied our markets." See Bulletin of the  
National Association of Wool Manufacturers (July, 1869,) of which Mr. Gilbert  
 
ually enlarging scale, until his death. A member of an Ortho-  
dox Congregational Church during all his public life, first in  
Worcester, then at Andover and finally at Ware, he contributed  
liberally to the maintenance of the gospel, and not only sus-  
tained public worship chiefly from his own purse, but by his  
will provided means for erecting a church, in the village which  
bears his name. He was a friend and benefactor of Mount  
Holyoke Seminary as well as of Amherst College. To the lat-  
ter he gave at different times and for different purposes some  
seven or eight thousand dollars. His donation of five thousand  
dollars to the Library is to increase by the addition of the in-  
terest to the principal until a new Library building is erected,  
or the present building is enlarged, and then is to be expended  
only in the purchase of books.  
 
For two years (1862 and 1863) Mr. Gilbert was a member of  
the Massachusetts Senate. We have known few finer looking  
men few men of more capacity for business, than Mr. Gilbert.  
But carried away with the excitement, not to say the passion of  
his growing manufacturing enterprises, he overworked his brain,  
1840, testifies in the warmest and strongest terms of Mr. Gilbert  
as a reliable man, with clear views of religious truth and de-  
cided convictions, whom nothing could move from what he  
thought to be duty, whose influence was positive and powerful  
in behalf of the Gospel of Christ, and who carried his religion  
into his business as few men do, not only in his unswerving in-  
and fostered the Department of Physical Culture, was born in  
Concord, Mass., February 2, 1796, graduated at Harvard College  
in 1819, and studied medicine with Dr. Warren and Dr. Jackson  
 
said to a gentleman about to give an address before this Association " preach to  
them that the surest means to attain ultimate success is to be constantly raising the  
 
in Boston. He came to Northampton in 1823, and practiced  
medicine there with reputation and success nearly a quarter of  
a century. Dr. Hunt, Dr. Denniston, and Dr. Thompson the  
most distinguished physicians of Northampton were at differ-  
ent times associated with him in medical practice. In 1846, he  
relinquished the profession, although he continued to act as con-  
sulting physician. Dr. Barrett held many offices of trust. He  
was a member of the House of Representatives in 1842, and  
in 1842 and 1843 he was State Senator. He was also County  
Commissioner, President of the County Temperance Societ}*,  
the Hampshire Medical Society, Chairman of the Schrjol Com-  
mittee, and first Treasurer and Secretary and then President of  
the Northampton Savings Bank. He was long an exemplary  
and useful member of the First Church in Northampton. Hon-  
est, upright, frank, cordial, genial, kindly and charitable, and at  
the same time intelligent, shrewd, foreseeing and far-seeing, he  
was beloved by his friends and neighbors, honored by the pub-  
lic and trusted by all who knew him. His donations to the  
Gymnasium have been already enumerated. In many other  
ways, he showed a lively and growing interest in Amherst Col-  
Mr. Baldwin, and others, so generously matched Dr. Walker's  
gift of forty thousand dollars with another forty thousand and  
thus secured the funds for Walker Hall, was born in Rutland,  
Mass., January 9, 1788. The son of a farmer in moderate cir-  
cumstances, and with no education beyond that of the common  
schools of his native place, he went, when a young man, into  
the employ, as a clerk, of Mr. Denny of Leicester in the manu-  
facture of cards, helped him make a large fortune, married his  
daughter, carried on the business himself successfully until 1838,  
then removed to Philadelphia and pursued the same business  
there until a few years ago when he retired, having accumulated  
a large property which he is now using in doing good. He be-  
gan his career of beneficence in Leicester where he early con-  
nected himself with Dr. Nelson's church, and became a liberal  
patron of Leicester Academy of which he was a Trustee, and  
 
to which he gave at one time ten thousand dollars. On his re-  
moval to Philadelphia, he was much interested in the effort com-  
menced by Dr. Todd, of establishing the First Congregational  
Church. When that Church became Presbyterian, he gave him-  
self to building up other Congregational churches in Philadel-  
phia, and is now the pillar, as he was among the pioneers, of  
Congregationalism in that city. He is a deacon in the Central  
Congregational Church for whom he has borne the chief burden  
of erecting a church edifice and a chapel costing a hundred and  
twenty thousand dollars. He has been a liberal contributor to  
Foreign and Home Missions, and has been especially active in  
helping young men to obtain an education for the ministry.  
 
Mr. Smith furnished Dr. Nathan Allen the principal part of  
the means of his education in Amherst Academy and Amherst  
College, which the Doctor repaid as soon as he was able. And  
to this apparently accidental circumstance, the College is in-  
debted for the ten thousand dollars which Mr. Smith contributed  
towards Walker Hall. For Dr. Allen was the connecting link  
between him and President Stearns who, by correspondence,  
from all others by the magnitude of their donations. These are  
Mr. Hitchcock of Brimfield, Dr. Walker of Newport, and Mr.  
Williston of Easthampton. Neither of them has given less than  
January 9, 1794. His grandfather was a clergyman in Connec-  
ticut. His father was a hatter in Brimfield. His mother was  
an active, energetic woman, and did what she could for her son.  
But their circumstances were such that his parents could give  
him no school education except what he obtained in the district  
school of his native town. Mr. Hitchcock remembers with honor  
and gratitude one of his teachers, Col. Issachar Brown, who  
" took a liking to him, did well by him," taught him the princi-  
pal part of what he learned from books and made him what he  
 
school himself one term what smart and thrifty Yankee did  
not in the good ol$ times ? had no trouble in a school in which  
two masters had failed and been turned out, and was solicited  
to continue teaching. But he preferred to go into business. It  
was a great trial that he could not have more and better educa-  
tion. He would have thought it an inestimable privilege, if he  
could have gone a single term to Monson Academy, like other  
boys of the town. This is doubtless one secret of his munifi-  
the Slaters in Webster, he followed the business himself for  
many years. For six years he had charge of a factory in South-  
bridge. Several years he resided in Boston, doing business there  
as a merchant. Having thus laid the foundation of his fortune  
by manufacturing and mercantile pursuits, he retired from active  
business and returned to his native town, where he has accumu-  
field, and has represented the town in the Legislature of Massa-  
chusetts. He was for many years Treasurer of the Parish in  
Brimfield, and President of the Bank in Southbridge. But ill-  
health and a difficulty of hearing have prevented his accepting  
office. He is a bachelor, and in great simplicity, temperance  
and economy, has lived a retired and quiet life.  
 
While a resident in Boston, he joined the Old South Church,  
then under the pastoral care of Dr. Wisner. From that he re-  
moved his relation to the church in Brimfield of which he is  
now a member. To this church he has given a fund of five  
thousand dollars towards the support of the minister. He has  
established the Hitchcock Free High School in Brimfield, en-  
dowing it with building and funds at an expense of eighty thou-  
sand dollars. He has given the Theological Seminary at Ando-  
ver one hundred and twenty thousand dollars. His donations  
to Amherst College began a quarter of a century ago, and form  
an aggregate of at least one hundred and seventy-five thousand  
 
chiefly for scholarships, a professorship and kindred purposes.  
The recent donation of one hundred thousand dollars, for a part  
of which, at least, we are indebted to the refusal of the Legisla-  
ture to do for Amherst in proportion to what it had done for  
other institutions, and which with characteristic promptness, he  
paid over to the Treasurer entire, just as soon as he announced  
his intention to give it, was the largest sum that ever came at  
once into the treasury of Amherst College.  
 
Dr. William Johnson Walker was born in Charlestown, Mass.,  
March 15, 1790, and died in Newport, R. I., April 2, 1865, be-  
ing a little over seventy-live years of age. He fitted for Col-  
lege at Phillips Academy, Andover, and graduated at Harvard  
University in 1810, with a highly respectable rank as a scholar,  
especially in Latin and Geometry in which he took great pleasure  
through life, and for which he showed his liking in his founda-  
tions at Amherst. He studied medicine first in Charlestown  
and then in Medford under the direction of Dr. John Brooks,  
afterwards Governor of Massachusetts ; and obtained the degree  
of Doctor of Medicine at the Massachusetts Medical College in  
1813. Soon after taking his medical degree, he sailed for France  
on a privateer fitted out from Boston to prey on the commerce  
of Great Britain, and reaching Paris devoted himself assidu-  
ously to the further study of his profession. After the abdica-  
tion of Napoleon, he went to London, and became a pupil of  
Sir Astley Cooper, and having spent six months in the prosecu-  
tion of his studies in Grey's and St. Thomas's Hospitals, he re-  
turned to the United States, and immediately commenced the  
practice of his profession in his native town where, by his skill  
and kindness, especially to the poor, he soon gained an exten-  
sive practice. He became an especial favorite with the younger  
members of his profession and was often called as a consulting  
physician and surgeon. He was for many years the physician  
and surgeon of the Massachusetts State Prison, and Consulting  
Surgeon of the Massachusetts General Hospital. After prac-  
ticing his profession about thirty years, he removed to Boston and  
turned his attention to various public improvements, especially  
in manufactures and railroads. " The mental qualities which  
 
walk, and he soon amassed a large fortune. But it was no  
sooner acquired, than he set about distributing it." l  
 
We have already given some account in former chapters of  
his principal donations to Amherst College, and the foundations  
built upon them. President Stearns has furnished, in the ad-  
dress already referred to, a graphic narrative of his conferences  
and correspondences with Dr. Walker, and the successive steps  
which led on to such unforeseen results. Beginning with the  
foundation of the Walker Professorship in 1861, he advanced  
rapidly more rapidly sometimes than the College found it con-  
venient to comply with his conditions, till, at his death in 1865,  
he had already given it about one hundred thousand dollars,  
which was increased by his legacies to about a quarter of a mil-  
lion. His donations and legacies to Amherst College were only  
a fraction of what he gave for educational purposes, Amherst  
being one of four institutions to which he bequeathed more than  
a million. 2  
 
We must also refer our readers to President Stearns' descrip-  
tion of the man peculiar, powerful, positive, persistent, impe-  
rious, passionate, impatient, but large-hearted, faithful in his  
friendships, grateful for acts of kindness, sympathizing with  
the afflicted, charitable, philanthropic, and in his own way re-  
ligious. The statutes of his foundations show large and en-  
lightened ideas of education. It was partly from his own expe-  
rience of incompetent teachers that he wished to provide better  
teachers. " You plead hard," said he in a letter to Dr. Stearns,  
" for the dull members of classes when you say they are some  
of them destined to fit boys to enter our Colleges, and therefore  
should be thoroughly drilled. / had just such instructors. I  
want no more of them Would to God my lines had fallen un-  
der skillful and accurate masters ! Can the blind lead the blind ?  
I trow not." With such personal recollections, philanthropic  
motives also strongly influenced him. " I have made most of  
my property," lie said, " since I retired from the world ; and al-  
 
1 Manuscript notice of Dr. Walker read before the Medical Society by Dr. Mor-  
 
most iny only object in doing it has been that I may contribute  
to education. I consider myself a steward in the distribution  
of my means. Tell the young men that if they take half the  
pleasure in deserving the prizes which I do in bestowing them,  
I shall be compensated. Tell them also that there is nothing  
worth living for but doing good to mankind."  
 
But Hon. Samuel Williston came to the relief and rescue of  
the College when it was in such imminent peril when pas-  
sengers and crew threatened to forsake a ship that seemed  
ready to sink, and even the captain and other officers almost  
despaired of its safety and not only rescued it but so repaired  
and refitted it and launched it as it were with new rigging, on  
a new voyage and almost on a new existence, that he well de-  
serves not only the highest rank among its pecuniary benefac-  
tors, but the title, by common consent, of its preserver and sec-  
ond founder.  
 
Samuel Williston was born in Easthampton, June 17, 1795,  
the twentieth anniversary of the battle of Bunker Hill. He  
was the son of Rev. Payson Williston of Easthampton who was  
the son of Rev. Noah Williston of West Haven, Conn. His  
mother, Mrs. Sarah Birdseye Williston, was also the daughter  
of a Connecticut clergyman, Rev. Nathan Birdseye of Strat-  
ford. His parents and grandparents were all remarkable for  
their longevity. His father lived to the age of ninety-three,  
and his father to the age of eighty -seven ; his mother to the age  
of eighty-two, and her father to his one hundred and third year.  
Mr. Willistou himself, it will be seen, is now in his seventy-eighth  
year. Rev. Payson Williston's salary never exceeded three hun-  
dred dollars, besides his settlement. I have heard Mrs. Williston  
say, that she often had some ministerial brother, with his whole  
family, stop for dinner, or to stay over night, when there was not  
enough in the whole house to give them a single meal. And  
when, in their poverty, they still persisted in 'giving for chari-  
table objects, Samuel, who was toiling on the farm for the sup-  
port of the family, sometimes doubted if it was not an excess  
of charity. More than once I have heard him say that he  
 
thousand. He began to work on a farm when he was ten, and  
continued so to work till he was sixteen, when his wages were  
seven dollars a month. The greater part of two winters, he  
worked in a clothier's shop till he became master of the art. He  
attended the district school in his native place summer and win-  
ter till he was ten years old ; then in the winter only till he was  
sixteen, at which age his schooling ceased altogether ; arid thence-  
forth he labored the year round, in the summer on the farm, and  
during the winter in the shop. Meanwhile, however, he lost  
no time, spent his evenings in reading and made the most of all  
the means of self-education within his reach. In the wirrfer of  
181314, with great satisfaction, he found means to spend a  
single term at the academy in Westfield. This awakened in  
him a strong desire for a College education, and he began the  
study of Latin, first with his father, and then with Rev. Mr.  
Gould of Southampton. In the summer of 1814, attracted partly  
by the reputation of the school, but more by the existence there  
of funds in aid of indigent students, he went to Phillips Acad-  
emy, then under the principal charge of Rev. John Adams, and  
enjoying also the instruction of Mr. Hawes, afterwards Dr.  
Hawes of the Centre Church in Hartford, Conn. He walked  
most of the way from Eastharnptou to Andover, carrying all he  
took with him pretty much all he had in the world tied up  
in a bundle. At Andover, for the sake of economy and exer-  
cise, he boarded a mile and a half from the Academy. But  
scarcely had he established his character as a deserving and  
tracted struggle which ensued his labors on the farm, his clerk-  
ships in West Springfield and New York City rendered unsuc-  
cessful by the state of his eyes and his general health till at  
length he gave up all hope either of an education or of success  
in business, and coming home settled down upon his father's  
farm to begin the life of a farmer without land, without capital,  
with almost nothing that he could call his own, and having run  
his father in debt for the very tools and implements with which  
he was to do his work. Thus he continued for four years, carry-  
 
ing on the farm in the summer and teaching school in the winter,  
till he became for that place and those times, quite a large  
farmer and wool-grower.  
 
Meanwhile two events had occurred which were destined to  
change and shape his whole subsequent life. Soon after leav-  
ing Andover, and just before going to New York, after a long  
and severe inward struggle, he began a new Christian life, and  
in due time became a member . of the Presbyterian Church un-  
der the pastoral care of Rev. Dr. Spring, in the city of New  
York.  
 
In the spring of 1822 (May 27), at the age of twenty-seven,  
he was married to Miss Emily Graves, daughter of Elnathan  
Graves, a respectable farmer in moderate circumstances in Wil-  
liamsburg, Mass. In illustration at once of the simplicity of the  
times and his own limited means, I have heard him say that  
he was married in a coat that he had already worn two years  
for Sundays and holidays, and that they took no bridal tour, no  
journey whatever after their marriage.  
 
In 1826, partly that she might be able to keep domestic help,  
and partly that she might have the means of enlarging her char-  
itable contributions, Mrs. Williston commenced that business of  
covering lasting buttons, which, beginning as her own handi-  
work, and gradually extending to her neighbors, soon employed  
thousands of busy and skillful .fingers through all that section,  
and after ten or a dozen years, at length, with the help of Mr.  
Hayden's mechanical ingenuity, enlisted the aid of machinery  
Mr. Williston for the career of Christian benevolence by which  
his life has been distinguished. Bereaved of two children at  
once and written childless twice in the space of six years, and  
thus led to feel that he had not done his whole duty as a  
steward of the Lord's property, he consecrated himself anew to  
his service, set apart the principal and interest of a considerable  
investment for benevolent purposes, and thus entered on a new  
epoch in his Christian life. In 1837 the year of his second  
bereavement he bore a prominent part in the erection of the  
 
house of worship now occupied by the First Church in East-  
hampton. In 1841, he established Williston Seminary. Early  
in 1845, he founded the Williston Professorship of Rhetoric and  
Oratory in Amherst College. Later in the same year, he spent  
six mouths in traveling in Europe. In the winter of 1846-7,  
he founded the Graves, now the Williston, Professorship of  
Greek, and one-half of the Hitchcock Professorship of Natural  
Theology and Geology in Amherst, thus making the sum of  
fifty thousand dollars which he had already given for permanent  
foundations, besides other donations to that Institution. From  
that time he has gone on adding factory to factory, house to  
house, and even one village to another, till, from one of the  
smallest, Easthampton has become one of the largest and most  
prosperous towns in Hampshire County. He has built churches,  
school-houses and town halls, enlarged the grounds and multi-  
plied the edifices of Williston Seminary, erected Williston Hall  
and helped erect other buildings for Amherst College, and in-  
creased the funds of both these institutions, till his donations to  
the two amount to nearly half a million, and extended and dif-  
fused his gifts for public, charitable, educational and religious  
the Massachusetts Legislature, and in 1842 and 1843 a member  
of the Senate. While a member of the Legislature in 1841, he  
was chosen by that body a Trustee of Amherst College. He  
was one of the first Trustees of the State Reform School, and  
was of great service in erecting buildings, improving the farm,  
and inaugurating the Institution. He was also one of the early  
Trustees of Mount Holyoke Seminary, and for many years a  
corporate member of the American Board. And he has not  
only been scrupulously faithful in these trusts and a constant  
attendant at the meetings of all these Boards, but in most of  
them he has at the same time been a liberal, often a munificent  
contributor to their funds. For more than thirty years, now,  
he has been a member of the Corporation of Amherst College,  
during the larger part of these years a member of the Pruden-  
tial Committee, and often of special committees on buildings  
 
and business matters of the utmost importance ; until the recent  
failure of his health he has been an unfailing attendant of ordi-  
nary and extraordinary meetings and unsparing not only of his  
money but also of his time which, to such a man, is more than  
money. And that knowledge of men and things which has been  
among the prime elements of his success in business, has made  
his counsels of scarcely less value to the Institution than his  
money and time. He has loved Ainherst as a child and loved  
all its friends for Ainherst's sake. So far from being jealous of  
other and recently larger benefactors, he has done all he could  
to help and encourage them. He helped to secure Walker Hall  
by giving ten thousand dollars although there were other forms  
in which he would have preferred to give it, and although he  
knew his name would be merged in that of the principal donor.  
When Mr. Hitchcock made his recent donation of a hundred  
thousand dollars, he said to the President, " Tell him, I thank  
him I honor him nay, tell him, I love him." Amherst is his  
foster-child. He is her foster-father. She owes to him her  
preservation, her very life. And if in token of her gratitude,  
and in fulfillment of the pledge given by President Hitchcock in  
the hour of her peril, she should at his death, since he will not  
permit it before, take his name, it would be but a small return  
for what he has been to her and done for her.  
 
Usage has appropriated the title of benefactors almost exclu-  
sively to pecuniary benefactors. Money is essential for the  
founding, building and endowing of Colleges. But no amount  
of funds or buildings, collections or external appliances whatso-  
ever, can make a College. Men officers and students consti-  
tute the College, and those who have given it their time and  
toil, their thoughts and counsels, their prayers and their personal  
services, may be its richest benefactors.  
 
One of the greatest benefactors of Amherst College has given  
it very little money and had very little to give. But he has  
given it almost fifty years of study and labor and care and pains-  
taking, of the ablest instructions, and the best services that have  
ever been given to this or any other College. The first student  
 
with all the officers and all the students and known by them all  
only to be loved and honored, identified in one way or another  
with the College through the entire half-century of its existence,  
and during all this time saying to it, not in words but by deeds  
which speak louder than words, like the Apostles to the impo-  
tent man in the Acts : " Silver and gold have I none, but what  
I have, give I thee," if Amherst College has ever had a greater  
benefactor than Professor Snell, I should like to know who he  
is. He stands unique in his relations to the College and alone  
in his glory. But if he is to be classed anywhere in the history  
of Amherst, I do not know where he can be more fitly placed  
than among its benefactors.  
 
Ebenezer Strong Snell was born in North Brookfield, October  
7, 1801, and was, therefore, a little short of twenty at the open-  
ing of Amherst College, September 18, 1821 ; a little less than  
twenty-one at his graduation the fourth Wednesday of August,  
1822 ; and was seventy about three months after the Semi-cen-  
tennial Jubilee, July 12, 1871. His whole life as a scholar and  
an educator has thus run parallel with the life of the College with  
which he has been identified, and of which he " has been so  
great a part." Having fitted for College partly with his father,  
Rev. Dr. Thomas Suell, and partly under Principal Parkhurst  
in Amherst Academy, in 1819 he entered the Sophomore class in  
Williams College, and at the close of his Junior year came with  
President Moore to Amherst, where he graduated, as everybody  
knows, in the first class and the first scholar in his class, although,  
at the Commencement, he delivered the Salutatory, and not the  
Valedictory Oration. l He used to go to Williamstown gener-  
ally in his father's chaise, sometimes in a private carriage, or  
wagon, with some fellow-student in the vicinity. It took him  
more time to go from North Brookfield across the hills and over  
the mountains, than it would now take to come from Bangor or  
Chicago. Hence he went home only once a year, and spent his  
other vacations with his cousins (one of whom was William C.  
Bryant,) at Cummington. The first Senior class in Amherst  
College could hardly have plunged very deep into the mysteries  
of metaphysics, for after the first term, Snell was absent most  
 
of the time, teaching in North Brookfield and in Amherst Acad-  
emy ; Fairchild, also, owing to ill health or affliction in the fam-  
ily, was away a good deal, and not present at Commencement ;  
what Field did in the absence of both his classmates, they hardly  
knew, and he does not distinctly remember.  
 
Thus beginning to teach in Amherst the very first year of the  
existence of the College, he has taught here ever since, now  
more than half a century. It seems to have been his father's  
hope that he would be a minister ; and his own conscience some-  
times chided him for not being one. But he was too self-dis-  
trustful, too diffident and timid to preach. It was several years  
before he consented to take his turn in officiating at morning  
prayers many years more before he could open his mouth  
in exhortation at a religious meeting. " Prof. Snell never  
preached," writes an alumnus, " but we all felt that his life was  
the best of sermons."  
 
From 1822 to 1825, he taught in Amherst Academy, first as  
the assistant of Zenas Clapp, and of David Green, and then as  
principal. In 1825, at the organization of the new Faculty un-  
der the charter, he was chosen Tutor. In 1827, he was ap-  
pointed Instructor in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy.  
From 1829 till 1834 he was nominally Adjunct Professor with  
Prof. Hovey, but in the absence of the latter in Europe and  
his continued ill health after his return, the duties devolved  
chiefly on the Adjunct Professor. In 1834, the Trustees ven-  
tured at length to appoint to a full Professorship of Mathemat-  
ics and Natural Philosophy the man who, for exactness, clearness,  
and method in teaching, has had no equal in Amherst and no  
superior anywhere ; who, as an experimental lecturer, to say the  
least, can not be surpassed ; and who, by his own mechanical in-  
genuity and handicraft and his progressive mastery of the sci-  
ence, with a comparatively trifling expenditure of money by the  
College has kept his cabinet abreast of the most costly appara-  
tus of the richest Colleges in the land ; while at the same time,  
he has invented and constructed not a few machines illustrative of  
Mechanics and Physics which are not to be found in any of them.  
 
sional corrections and criticisms of Prof. Olmsted's works, kindly  
communicated and as kindly received, that he was led gradually  
Doctor of Laws ; in 1805 he received the same degree from  
Western Reserve College. The Class of '65, at their Com-  
mencement dinner, presented him with a fine portrait of himself  
as an expression of their grateful and affectionate appreciation  
of his services to them and to the College. On the 7th of Octo-  
ber, 1871, his seventieth birthday, the Senior and Junior classes  
who either had enjoyed or were then enjoying his instructions,  
together with his colleagues, the officers of College, nearly  
all of whom had been his pupils, surprised him in his Lecture  
Room in Walker Hall, by the presentation of an elegant easy  
chair. In presenting it in behalf of the officers and students,  
Prof. Tyler said : " A few of your friends all who know you  
are your friends and everybody knows you hence I say a few  
of your friends have taken the liberty to intrude into your  
presence that we may look into the face of one who has this day  
arrived at the ripe and rare age of threescore years and ten.  
We wish to congratulate you on a life which has been as hon-  
ored, useful and happy as it has been long, and to rejoice with  
you in the serenity of its evening. ... We are all your pupils.  
The oldest' of us have sat at your feet for instruction, and the  
youngest of us still look up to you and delight to call you mas-  
ter. Your instructions are still just as clear and vigorous as they  
were forty years ago, and a great deal more wise. Your lectures  
grow more perfect as you grow older, and your experiments are  
more interesting and more unfailing, as you advance in years.  
Your hand is still steady, and your step still elastic. Still your  
eye is not dimmed, nor your natural force abated. We thank you  
for your instructions, and still more for your example which is  
the best lesson you ever taught us. We ask your paternal, nay,  
your patriarchal benediction. And we ask permission to leave  
with you a slight token of our filial regard very slight and al-  
together inadequate to measure your desert or express our ap-  
preciation of it."  
 
In response, the Professor with characteristic modesty said to  
his colleagues and older pupils that they were always overrating  
him, and to the under-graduates with an aptness and quaintness  
equally characteristic, that such presentations had been some-  
what frequent of late, and he did not know but the donors  
might be partially influenced by the proverb that a gift blindeth  
the eyes, but if they were, they would probably find themselves  
mistaken. The same kind of quaint and pithy pleasantry runs  
through his address at the Semi-Centennial. " This occasion  
tells me," he says, " as my friends are often telling me, that  
I am an old man, and I am becoming quite accustomed to the  
appellation. I suppose I ought to feel some infirmities ; but here  
is just where I fail. I am not conscious of any infirmities, ex-  
cept the numerous ones which have always attended me. It may  
be supposed that I am mature enough to put on spectacles ; but  
I do not yet see clearly any good reason for doing so. And as to  
a cane, I have had any number of canes presented to me. The  
gift I always accept but I never take the hint. It is possible  
however that the Sophomoric weakness may yet fall upon me,  
and that I shall appear abroad with all my canes at once. I  
perform my College work with as much ease and interest as I  
ever did. And really I feel some solicitude lest I shall not know  
when to resign unless some one tells me."  
 
I have ventured to call attention to several expressions in this  
passage by italicising them, for it seems to me, there is in them  
a quiet humor and a happy turn of expression which Charles  
Lamb himself could hardly surpass. This vein of humor, con-  
trasting so singularly with his serious air and his mathematical  
exactness is continually cropping out in the class room, in the  
Faculty meeting, in the family and in society, and helps to make  
him one of the most genial of companions and colleagues as well  
as one of the most admired and beloved of teachers. He is  
even getting up quite a reputation in his old age for occasional  
speeches ; and if all the puns, bon mofs, pleasantries and pun-  
gencies which have dropped from his lips in all these various  
ways, could be gathered up, no other Professor or President  
of Amherst College could match them, and they would make a  
 
Prof. Snell is quite capable of enjoying and sometimes per-  
petrating a practical joke. As long ago as when he was Tu-  
tor, an old dilapidated post and rail fence ran across the hill in  
front of the College from the Boltwood to the Dickinson cor-  
ner. One night, about nine o'clock, attracted by unusual noises,  
the Tutor looked out of his College window, and saw the ground  
all alive with students running to and fro like ants over an ant-  
hill. He soon discovered that the Sophomores were pulling up  
this old fence. Attiring himself as nearly as possible like one  
of their own number, he joined the company, and placing him-  
self at their head, said: "Young gentlemen, this is a gO(5d work,  
if only well done come, let's do it up right let's clear off  
posts and rails, and leave not a trace of the old fence on the  
ground." So following his example, they pulled up every post,  
carried off every rail, and piled up the whole fence in mathe-  
matical order and Snell-like neatness at the north and south  
ends; and then dispersed to their rooms. The next morning,  
he called one of the oldest and best of the class (for he knew  
them all, and some of them were among the best young men  
in all College) and said to him : " The fence was a nuisance  
it ought to have been abated ; and the class did the work well :  
the only objection to it is that it might perhaps better have been  
done in the day-time." And there the matter ended.  
 
Delicate, refined and shrinking as a girl, I am told, he went  
by the name of " Miss Snell " in Amherst Academy, so fair was he  
in form and features, so modest in demeanor and so loved and  
admired by his pupils. I shall never forget his round cheeks, his  
laughing eyes and his fair complexion any more than his clear,  
exact and methodical questions, when I appeared before him  
more than forty years ago in the old Parsons house where he  
then lived, to be examined privately for admission to the Junior  
class in Amherst College ; and as I recall the picture, then  
photographed on my memory, he looks to me very much like  
one of those cherubs in the Sistine Madonna. And as I review  
with rapid glance all the scenes and associations through which  
we have passed together from that day to this as I recall the  
master, the colleague, the companion, the friend, the elder  
 
faultlessly he has borne himself in all these relations as I see  
the simple beauty and grandeur of such a life and character  
strengthened and polished continually by the lapse of years and  
only softened and sanctified by old age I can not trust my-  
self to say what I think and feel. I can only say, " Very pleas-  
ant hast thou been unto me, my brother." And I am sure all the  
officers and all the students whether graduates or under-gradu-  
ates that have been associated with him at different times during  
nor are we willing to have him left out of it. Between us,  
what is said will have to be more than he may think proper, but  
less than we would like.  
 
William Seymour Tyler, Williston Professor of the Greek  
Language and Literature in Amherst College, was born in Har-  
ford, Susquehanna County, Penn., September 2, 1810. His  
father was an enterprising, intelligent farmer, and a devoted  
Christian ; his mother a woman of more than ordinary intellect,  
ate there; but had been there only one term when President  
Davis and Prof. Strong left, and all but two of the Junior class,  
to which young Tyler belonged, left with them. Tyler came  
to Amherst, and with him Schneider, the missionary, and one  
other. In 1830 he graduated; was Tutor from 1832 to 1834;  
and has been Professor, first of Latin and Greek, and then of  
 
He had no idea of leading the life he has led. He was two  
years in the Theological Seminary at Andover, and spent one  
winter with Dr. Skinner in New York City, in the class out of  
which the Union Theological Seminary was developed. He was  
licensed to preach, February 29, 1836, by the Third Presbytery  
of New York, and soon after started for the West, where he ex-  
pected to spend his life as a missionary. But the traveling was  
so bad, the stage refused to take his luggage ; and while waiting  
for the roads to settle, he was invited to Amherst to fill out an  
unexpired Tutorship of one term, and before the term ended  
was appointed Professor. And so his lot was ordered fjpr him  
by the Providence which wisely shapes our rough-hewed ends.  
If he has had less of hardship, and more of honor, than he ex-  
pected, he can honestly say that the ease and honor have not  
been of his own seeking. He has preached abundantly, inside  
of College, and outside of it. In 1859 he was ordained without  
charge. In 1857 Harvard College gave him the title of D. D.,  
and his Alma Mater the title of LL.D., in 1871.  
 
His colleague Prof. Snell, writes to me of him as follows :  
 
" I first knew Prof. Tyler as my pupil in Mathematics and  
Natural Philosophy, in his Junior year. He came at that time  
from Hamilton College, N. Y., to join Amherst. I was at once  
interested in him as an earnest student of every subject to which  
his attention was directed. He was not only thorough in pre-  
paring his lessons and regular at all the exercises of his class,  
but every question proposed for voluntary examination, he was  
eager to study out, and very successful in solving. So far as I  
could judge from what I saw of him in my recitation room, I  
should have thought that mathematical science was his favorite  
study. Afterwards, while Tutor in College, he took up the dif-  
ferential and integral calculus as a side study along with the  
Greek language, which he was teaching. He was never satis-  
fied with indistinct or partial views on any subject. Whatever  
he studied, he wanted not only to know, but to know thoroughly  
and critically. His whole course as a Professor shows this trait  
and it has made him a constantly and steadily growing man.  
 
" Prof. Tyler's course as an officer of College has been marked  
by great fidelity, not only as a teacher in the class-room, but to  
 
all his pupils as a guide and adviser. I think no officer in Am-  
herst College has ever done so much as Prof. Tyler for the indi-  
good judgment, and sound common sense. He is an eminently  
practical man ; and his practical wisdom has always made him a  
most valuable adviser in matters pertaining to College govern-  
1833, when my class, then Sophomores, began to recite to him  
in Geometry. His curt, clear way of conducting the recitations  
made a very strong impression upon me. During my tutorship  
at Amherst from 1839 to 1842 I knew him of course more inti-  
mately ; but most intimately of all during the months of Janu-  
ary and February, 1870, when we were together upon the Nile.  
Our relations now are such that I can not permit myself to say  
all I think of him as a man, a scholar, and a Christian. He  
knows what I mean, and that is enough.  
 
As a classical teacher his more recent pupils are loud in his  
praise. They speak of the rare facult} r he has of calling up a  
great number of students in a given time, and of laying open  
very shrewdly by rapid questioning their knowledge or their  
ignorance, as the case may be. His " next " has almost as many  
inflections as a Chinese vocable. Like all good men, he has mel-  
lowed with age. He has profited by the advice of Ex-Speaker  
Grow, " not to see quite so much of what is going on."  
 
He has twice visited the Old World ; once in 18556, when  
he traveled especially in Italy, Greece and Palestine ; and again  
Amherst, being one of the Trustees of Mount Holyoke Semi-  
nary at South Hadley, Williston Seminary at Easthampton, Ma-  
plewood Institute at Pittsfield, and the recently founded Smith  
(Female) College at Northampton.  
 
The following is a list of his publications : " Germania and  
 
Agricola of Tacitus, with Notes for Colleges ; " D. Appleton  
& Co., New York, 1847. " Histories of Tacitus ; " D. Apple-  
ton & Co., New York, 1848. " Plato's Apology and Crito ; "  
D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1859. " Plutarch on the Delay  
of the Deity," etc. ; Hackett & Tyler ; D. Appleton & Co., New  
York, 1867. " Theology of Greek Poets ; " Draper & Halli-  
day, Boston, 1867. Premium Essay, " Prayer for Colleges ; "  
New York, 1854 ; revised and enlarged repeatedly. " Memoir  
of Lobdell," missionary to Assyria ; Boston, 1859. " History of  
Amherst College ; " 1873. " Address at Semi-Centennial, with  
other Addresses delivered on that occasion ; " 1871. Articles  
in quarterlies and monthlies, chiefly on classical subjects, and  
printed discourses on public occasions, especially during the  
war, quite numerous.  
 
