CHAPTER XIV.  
 
PERIOD OF 'REACTION AND DECLINE RESIGNATION OF  
PRESIDENT HUMPHREY.  
 
THE largest aggregate number of students that Amherst Col-  
lege enrolled on its catalogue at any time previous to 1870-71,  
was in the collegiate year 1836-7, when the number was two  
hundred and fifty-nine. The next year, 1837-8, it had fallen to  
two hundred and six, and it continued to decrease regularly till  
in 1845-6, it was reduced to one hundred and eighteen, less than  
half the number nine years before.  
 
The number entering College began to diminish some three  
years earlier. The largest number of students ever admitted to  
the College was in 1833-4, when there were eighty-five Fresh-  
men, and the whole number of admissions was one hundred and  
six. The next year, 1834-5, there were seventy Freshmen, and  
the whole number of admissions was ninety-nine. From this  
time, the number entering College continued to decrease, till in  
1843-4, the Freshmen numbered only thirty-two, and the whole  
number of new members was only forty-two.  
 
Some of the causes which produced this remarkable decline,  
are sufficiently obvious. In the first place it was doubtless to  
some extent a natural reaction from the equally remarkable and  
almost equally rapid increase of numbers in the previous his-  
tory of the College. As the tide of prosperity had risen very  
fast and high, so it sank with corresponding rapidity to a pro-  
portionally low ebb. The growth had been unprecedented,  
abnormal and not altogether healthy. The causes which pro-  
duced it, were in part temporary, and so far forth the effect  
could not be enduring. These causes had not indeed ceased to  
 
The first alarm, excited by the defection of Harvard College,  
and the churches in that section, had in a measure subsided.  
Zeal for Orthodoxy and evangelical piety was no longer at a  
white heat. The passion for missions and the education of min-  
isters had somewhat cooled. Revivals were less frequent in the  
churches. The revivals which marked the twenty years be-  
tween 1815 and 1835, had given birth to the College, and nour-  
ished it with a copious supply of young men recently converted  
and full of zeal for the work of the ministry and of missions.  
As revivals grew less frequent and powerful, one of the prin-  
cipal sources of the prosperity of Amherst College began to  
fail.  
 
The growth of the Institution had unavoidably changed some-  
what its relations to the community around it. The people of  
the village were still friendly to the College, but they had ceased  
to regard it as their own offspring or foster-child they could  
no longer welcome and cherish its two hundred and fifty stu-  
dents as pets or wards in their own families ; the halcyon days  
of primitive and almost pastoral simplicity when their apple-  
orchards and walnut-groves, their parlors and firesides, their  
homes and hearts were open to the members of the College gen-  
erally, almost as if they were their own sons, had gone never to  
return. Board was perhaps fifty per cent, higher than it was  
at the opening of the College. The influx of wealthy students  
by changing the tastes and habits of the community, had in-  
creased in a still greater percentage the incidental and unneces-  
sary expenses. The term-bills, including tuition and room-rent,  
which, at the first, were only ten or eleven dollars per term,  
had now risen to seventeen dollars, and the maximum of neces-  
sary College expenses, including board, fuel and lights, which in  
1834 was stated in the , catalogue at ninety-six dollars a year,  
was estimated in 1837 at one hundred and fifty dollars. This  
was still considerably less than at Harvard or Yale, but the dif-  
ference was less than it formerly was, and the expenses at Am-  
herst were now greater than they were at some of the other  
New England Colleges. Relatively the economy of an educa-  
tion at Amherst was considerably less than it had been, and  
 
dents who flocked to Amherst in crowds in the earlier years of  
its history.  
 
A still more important change had gradually come over the  
relations between the students and the Faculty. The circum-  
stances under which the College originated, made its officers  
and students more like one great family, than they were in the  
older and larger Institutions, more so probably than they were  
in any other College. The government was truly a paternal  
government, and the students cherished a remarkably filial spirit  
towards the President and Professors. But when Amherst came  
soon to be the largest College in New England, with a single  
exception, when it contained more than two hundred and fifty  
students of all characters and habits, from all ranks and classes  
of the community, and from all parts of the United States, it  
was no longer practicable to maintain so familiar and confiden-  
tial a relation, it was no longer possible to administer the  
government in the same paternal way, it was no longer pos-  
sible that the students should cherish just the same filial feel-  
ing and spirit towards the Faculty. The men who composed  
the Faculty might be the same, it was the same President and  
the same leading older Professors, under whose auspices the  
College had attained so soon to so large a growth, that were  
now administering the government and giving the instruction ;  
yet they could not but draw the reins a little tighter, they  
could not exercise the same personal supervision, the same  
fatherly watch and care over two hundred students which they  
had extended to one hundred. It was not the same students,  
they were not of the same age, class and condition in life ; upon  
an average they were younger and richer and less.religious when  
they entered now than they were ten or fifteen years earlier in  
the history of the College ; but even if they had been the very  
same individual students, they could not come so near to their  
officers, or stand in the same. near and confidential relations, or  
cherish quite the same feelings of personal regard and aifec-  
tion, as when they were fewer in number and were in some  
sense joint-founders of the Institution. There are evils, diffi-  
culties and dangers inevitably connected with a large College  
 
elude the possibility of its realizing the idea of a College, or  
doing in the best way its whole and proper work ; and among  
the breach. One of these was the anti-slavery excitement. This  
affected Amherst more than it did most of the Eastern Colleges ;  
for while it had an unusual number of Southern students be-  
tween 1830 and 1840, 1 it had also a larger proportion than most  
of the colleges, of that class of students who were strongly,  
and some of them violently opposed to slavery. It was during  
this decennary, as our readers will remember that the anti-  
slavery excitement, which temporarily subsided after the Mis-  
souri compromise, broke out with fresh violence and agitated  
the whole country. The Liberator, started in Boston by Wil-  
liam Lloyd Garrison for the express purpose of agitating this  
question, was established in 1831, the New England Anti-  
Slavery Society (afterwards the Massachusetts) in 1832, the  
American Anti-Slavery Society in 1833. In 1834, George  
Thompson came over from England and his clarion-like voice  
rung through the land, and in 1835 Mr. Garrison was dragged  
through the streets of Boston by an infuriated mob and saved  
from a violent death only by incarceration in the city jail. Such  
exciting scenes could not but deeply move the feelings of young  
men in our Colleges and professional schools. When news-  
papers, tracts and books, lectures, public meetings, and organ-  
ized societies were doing their utmost to agitate the public mind,  
it would be strange if young men in college did not discuss the  
subject, debate it in their classes and literary societies, take  
sides on it, and, if permitted, form societies for the express pur-  
pose of influencing public sentiment. The Theological Semi-  
nary at Andover was much agitated at this time, and the excite-  
son of Virginia, who became so conspicuous in the history of the late war. Mr.  
Palmer was a member of the Class of '35, but graduated prematurely in his Junior  
year. Mr. Robinson graduated with honor in the Class of '36.  
 
that Lane Seminary was convulsed by " the Anti-Slavery Im-  
broglio," as Dr. Beecher called it, to such a degree that the  
students went off almost in a body and built up a Theological  
Department at Oberlin. It was under such circumstances that  
a Colonization Society and an Anti Slavery Society were formed  
among the students at Amherst, the latter in the summer of  
1833, and the former a short time previous, perhaps not more  
than two or three weeks. Thus the College was divided as it  
were into two hostile camps, and the war raged as fiercely be-  
tween these opposing forces in their classic halls as that between  
the Greeks and Trojans of which the young men read in the  
Iliad, and it lasted quite as long before it fully came to an end.  
The Faculty seeing that fellow-students, and even Christian  
brethren were thus set in hostile array against each other, feel-  
ing that the College was not founded to be a school of moral  
or political reform, and fearing that its reputation, as well as  
its peace and prosperity might thus be endangered, at length  
interposed, and endeavored to persuade the members of both  
societies to dissolve their organizations. The members of the  
Colonization Society complied with this request. The members  
of the Anti-Slavery Society returned answer that they could  
not conscientiously dissolve the Society by their own act, begged  
the privilege of at least holding the monthly concert of prayer  
the original eight members to a membership of seventy-eight,  
nearly one-third of the whole number of students in College.  
" Of this number," I quote from a history of these transactions  
in manuscript prepared at my request by a leading member, 1 " all  
but six were professors of religion. Thirty of the number had  
consecrated themselves to the missionary work in foreign lands,  
and twenty to the work of home missions in the West. The  
first recognized agency that led several of these young men to  
decide upon the missionary service, were these investigations  
 
and other exercises of their regular meetings were in the main  
dignified and eminently Christian, though always earnest 'and  
animated. Their concerts of prayer were among the tenderest  
and most useful seasons of religious devotion they had during  
their connection with College.  
 
" In October, 1834, the Society were summoned to meet Dr.  
Humphrey in a body in the Theological room. Very fully and  
kindly the President then stated his feelings, assuring the ' young  
gentlemen' to their amazement, that the Society was alienating  
Christian brethren, retarding and otherwise injuring the cause  
of religion in College, and threatening in many ways the pros-  
perity of the Institution. In view of these considerations pre-  
sented with evident honesty, he called upon the Society at once  
and entirely to disband, hold no more meetings, have no more  
discussions and, if possible, keep peace with all on this exciting  
subject.  
 
"As soon as possible the Society was called together for  
prayer and deliberation. Again and again and with a calmness  
.which astonished themselves, they discussed the propriety of  
acceding to the President's demand; but the more they dis-  
cussed and prayed and thought, the more fixed were they all in  
the conviction that they could not, as Christians and as men, take  
upon themselves the responsibility of disbanding their Society  
and ignoring the great question of the times, touching a subject  
rial on the subject as a reply to Dr. Humphrey's appeal. The  
memorial was prepared, read in a very full meeting, and, with-  
out a dissenting voice, adopted and sent to the Faculty."  
 
This memorial, of which the original draft is preserved, speaks  
with the greatest respect and even tenderness of the Faculty,  
acknowledging the purity of their motives and the love of their  
hearts, and saying, " we would gladly comply with your request  
if we could do it consistently with the dictates of our con-  
sciences and the wants and woes of perishing millions," but at  
the same time adding the unanimous resolution of the Society,  
"that we can not conscientiously disband and relinauish the  
 
right of inquiring into, discussing and praying over the suffer-  
ings and woes of more than two millions of our population."  
 
They conclude with begging the privilege at least of being  
permitted to hold as a Society their usual monthly concert of  
prayer, and praying that if they must be disbanded, the Faculty  
would do the work themselves by a direct and positive com-  
mand, which they pledge themselves not to resist.  
 
Feeling that this " very respectful memorial " was " entitled  
to serious and deliberate consideration," and reluctant to resort  
to extreme measures if they could possibly avoid it, the Faculty,  
after some weeks' delay, made another communication to the  
Society, in which they consent to " let the Association remain  
for the present under the following regulations : 1. To meet as  
a Society, if you see fit, once a month as you have been accus-  
tomed to, chiefly for prayer, and to hold no other meetings.  
 
" 2. To receive such new members at your option as may wish  
to join you without solicitation.  
 
" 3. It is understood that discussions and formal addresses  
before the Society will hereafter be entirely discontinued.  
 
" 4. It is understood that neither the Society nor individual  
members of it will correspond with editors of newspapers or  
other persons, so as to bring it in any way before the public."  
 
At the same time the Faculty disclaim any intention to inter-  
fere in any degree with the private opinions of the members of  
the Society on the subject of slavery, or with the avowal of  
them as individuals as freely as on any other subject, nor with  
the bringing of the great question of slavery forward for de-  
bate in the regular order of College exercises by either party,  
provided it can be discussed with that perfect good feeling  
which is essential in such a community.  
 
This communication seems to have been received by the mem-  
bers of the Society with mingled emotions of surprise and dis-  
pleasure " too deep for appropriate outward expression. A few  
of the more ardent and impulsive spirits soon gave vent to their  
indignation and declared themselves ready to leave the College.  
But they were held in check by the large and more prudent  
majority, who strongly advised the Society to yield a passive sub-  
 
The excitement extended also beyond the ranks of the So-  
ciety, and so strongly roused the minds of many without that  
they besieged the door of the Secretary's room in his absence  
and bursting it open found the constitution and subscribed their  
names to the list of members. In the same spirit of resistance  
to what they deemed an exercise of undue and arbitrary author-  
ity, " some person or persons unknown to the Society and its  
officers," purloined from the Secretary's room a copy of the me-  
morial to the Faculty, and sent it for publication to the editors  
of one or more anti-slavery papers, thus extending the arena of  
discussion, criticism and excitement from the College through  
the community.  
 
After discussing the subject at two meetings, the Society re-  
turned a written response to the communication of the Faculty,  
in which, while they gratefully acknowledge the high tone of  
Christian feeling and affectionate interest in their welfare evinced  
throughout that document, they yet declare their unanimous  
conviction that their duty as men and as Christians forbids their  
compliance with the conditions of existence submitted in it.  
 
This communication was laid before the Faculty at their meet-  
ing, February 16, 1835. They voted that they could not con-  
sistently alter or annul the conditions, and the next day Presi-  
dent Humphrey communicated the result in writing to the So-  
ciety. "We fully accord," he says, "with the opinion recently  
expressed by the whole body of students in the Andover Theo-  
logical Seminary, that in the present agitated state of the public  
mind, it is inexpedient to keep up any organization under the  
name of anti-slavery, colonization or the like, in our literary and  
theological institutions. This, we believe, is coming to be more  
and more the settled judgment of the enlightened and pious  
friends of these Institutions throughout the country. Indeed,  
we are not aware that any such Society as yours now exists in  
any respectable College but our own in the land.  
 
" You inform us that ' on due and careful deliberation,' you  
can not comply with 'the conditions of existence' specified in  
our last communication. Now, as we, on our part, can not con-  
sistently with our sense of duty, modify or annul those condi-  
tions, the case is perfectly plain. You would not ask us to vio-  
 
late our trust or our consciences. As you can not comply, your  
Society must cease to exist, just as the Colonization Society has  
done already."  
 
After receiving this communication, the Society held one long,  
spirited and somewhat excited meeting, and then bowing in  
silence and sorrow to the authority of the government, the So-  
ciety ceased to exist. During that same term, the spring term  
of 1835, the Faculty and students labored together and rejoiced  
together in the religious revival whose history we have narrated  
in a previous chapter ; and none labored more faithfully to pro-  
mote it, none rejoiced more heartily in its blessed fruits (so all  
will agree, even those who differed most from them in this ex-  
citing controversy,) than many of the young men who had been  
members of this Anti-Slavery Society.  
 
After such stringent and decisive action in suppressing the  
Society, we should hardly expect to see it revived and reorgan-  
ized with substantially the same constitution and with the ex-  
press permission of the Faculty. Yet such was the fact. In  
less than two years from the suppression, viz., November 23,  
1836, we find them granting permission to the anti-slavery men  
to hold a monthly concert. And in less than three years, that  
is, in December, 1837, we read on the records votes granting 4  
" the request of the petitioners for an Anti-Slavery Society in  
College," and approving the constitution as presented by the  
petitioners. This change of policy was doubtless the result  
partly of a change of circumstances and partly of a change of  
feelings in the minds of the Faculty. The first outburst of pas-  
sion and excitement in the community had in a measure sub-  
sided, and the subject might now be discussed, it was thought,  
with less danger to the peace and the prosperity of the Institu-  
tion. Moreover, an event had occurred meanwhile in College,  
which turned the tide of sympathy and feeling strongly in favor  
of the anti-slavery cause. Ever since the Society had been in  
existence, students from the South, " the chivalry," as they were  
quite willing to be called, had from time to time shaken their  
fists and canes in the faces of the members and threatened them  
 
dents were going out from prayers in the chapel, a scene took  
place which was the antecedent and anticipation of that which  
was afterwards enacted in the Capitol at Washington in the  
person of Senator Sumner, and with similar results on a smaller  
scale. Robert C. McNairy of Nashville, Tenn., who had just at-  
tained to the dignity of a Sophomore, celebrated his elevation  
to that exalted dignity by severely beating a member of the  
class above him, John L. Ashley, of Bradford, N. H., with a  
heavy cane. The offender was speedily arraigned before a mag-  
istrate in the village. His fellow-students from the same sec-  
tion, and others who sympathized with them, thronged the room  
and overawed the Justice, and the offender was let off with a  
fine of five dollars. The next term the Faculty investigated  
the case and expelled him from the College. The following  
record will show the light in which they viewed the affair :  
 
" Whereas Robert McNairy, then a member of the Sophomore  
class, in this College, did on the morning of last Commence-  
ment and immediately after prayers in the chapel, violently at-  
tack and cruelly beat a fellow-student, with a heavy cane, thus  
maiming his person, if not putting his life in jeopardy, and  
whereas this gross violation of the laws was aggravated by the  
time when and the place where the assault was made, therefore,  
 
" Voted 1, That our duty to the College as a public Insti-  
tution and to the members of it entitled to our protection, as far  
hereby expelled"  
 
It can not be doubted that the anti-slavery excitement im-  
paired somewhat the confidence and' affection of a large portion  
of the students, (and those the most ardent and earnest students  
of the College) for the Faculty, and especially alienated some  
of the most zealous of them from the President, who was the  
organ of communication, and was regarded as the author of the  
policy that was pursued. 1  
 
1 The anti-slavery men of this period were under the impression, right or wrong,  
that the sympathies, of Prof. Hitchcock were with them, although the act of sup-  
 
But the opposition to the system of distinctive and honorary  
appointments in College, which sprung up about the same time,  
lasted longer and was still more unfortunate in its influence.  
As early as 1834, the Junior class, under the influence of the  
dissatisfaction attendant as usual on the appointments for the  
Junior Exhibition, petitioned the Trustees at their annual meet-  
ing to abolish the system. Upon this petition, the Trustees voted,  
" That we think it inexpedient to make any alteration at present  
on the subject of said communication, but we recommend that  
the Faculty correspond with the other Colleges on this subject  
and obtain such information as may be communicated for such  
improvement hereafter as occasion may require." At their an-  
nual meeting in 1836, a petition was again presented, signed by  
nearly, if not quite, all the members of the three upper classes,  
asking for the abolition " of the present system of appoint-  
ments in this Institution," and suggesting instead, that "such a  
division and arrangement be made that all may have parts as-  
signed them, and alike enjoy the benefits arising from such per-  
formances," or that " each of the three Literary Societies in  
College should be permitted to have an annual exhibition." !  
The action of the Trustees upon this petition is thus entered on  
their records : " A petition having been presented to this Board  
signed by numerous members of Amherst College, praying for  
the abolition of the system of appointments adopted in this  
College, Voted, that this Board deem it inexpedient to make  
any change at present in the system provided for by the College  
laws on this subject."  
 
Meanwhile the Faculty began to be besieged by petitions  
from individual students asking to be excused from performing  
the parts assigned them on the ground of conscientious opposi-  
tion to the system of honorary distinctions. And for a time  
the Faculty granted these requests. At length it became ap-  
parent that there was, if not a conspiracy, a set purpose on the  
part of many students, some of them perhaps really conscien-  
 
1 This petition is preserved in the College Library. It is an immense document  
some five feet long and a foot and a half wide, bearing in bold and large hand the  
 
tious, but others manifestly only disappointed in their own ap-  
pointments, or otherwise disaffected, to break down the system,  
and that if they would have any exhibitions or Commence-  
ments, they must insist upon the performance of the parts as-  
signed for public occasions with the same firmness and on the  
same principles as they required the recitation of lessons or the  
performance of any other assigned duty. They therefore de-  
clined to excuse appointees simply on the ground of conscien-  
tious scruples without the assignment of some other reasons.  
Among those who were excused in the summer of 1835 was  
William O. Gorham of Enfield, who had been appointed one of  
the Prize Speakers 1 from the Freshmen, and having requested to  
be excused " on grounds of conscience," his request was granted.  
Two years later, the same student received an appointment for  
with feelings and views utterly opposed to the present system  
of appointments in this Institution. I have ever heartily des-  
pised and contemned the principle, and a more intimate ac-  
quaintance with it since I have been here, has rendered its ef-  
fects more odious to my sense of justice. With either I can and  
do have no sympathy. As I can not give countenance to this  
system in heart nor in tongue, I certainly will not in deed. I  
beg, therefore, to be freed from my appointment at the coming  
Exhibition and all further annoyance from this source.  
1837, and it was " Voted, that Gorham's case be referred to the  
President." The President had an interview with him and  
dealt very faithfully, perhaps somewhat severely with him, 2  
 
1 There had been considerable trouble and excitement for some time in regard to  
the manner of appointing Prize Speakers, as well as in regard to the persons ap-  
pointed.  
 
2 If the President's language was severe, ("and he said he excoriated him,) the  
 
setting before him the sentiments, the spirit and the language  
of the paper, in the clear light of that strong common sense and  
in the strenuous use of that plain Saxon English of which he  
was the perfect master. But the only result was to widen the  
breach, to exasperate the feelings of the young man, and to  
rouse and perhaps ruffle a little the spirit of the President.  
This result was reported to the Faculty at their weekly meeting  
June 23d, and they voted to require of him a written acknowl-  
edgment under penalty, if he refused, of being removed from  
College. The acknowledgment which he was required to sign,  
was in the following language :  
 
" In presenting this paper (his previous communication) to  
the Faculty, I did not intend any disrespect to them or resist-  
ance to the laws of College, but on serious reflection I am con-  
vinced that the language was highly improper and not only so,  
but expressed my determination to disobey the laws of College.  
classmates attempted to mediate between him and the Faculty  
and obtain some modification of the language of the confession.  
The Faculty voted that he " have liberty to present an acknowl-  
and signed by himself, as follows :  
 
" In presenting the above paper to the Faculty I did not  
intend any disrespect or resistance to the laws of College. I  
supposed I had a perfect right to accept or decline the honor  
conferred on me. I have since learned that they regard the  
appointments as obligatory upon those who receive them, and a  
refusal as an infringement upon the laws. So construed the  
language was disrespectful to the Faculty and expressed a de-  
termination to disobey one of the laws of College. Had such  
been my intention, I confess, it would have been utterly wrong,  
and it is with deep regret I find my language capable of so  
odious a construction."  
 
This paper was not satisfactory to the Faculty, chiefly because  
 
in view of their action in repeated instances during the previous  
year it must have been generally known in College that they  
regarded the appointments as obligatory and not to be accepted  
or declined at the option of the student, and, therefore, they  
could not regard the confession offered by Gorham as in his  
case either truthful or ingenuous, and he was accordingly re-  
moved from College. The entire class, with a single excep-  
tion, 1 now rallied to the support of their classmate and joined  
opinion William O. Gorham has made every concession which  
duty and justice require, and in refusing to concede more, we  
heartily approve of his principles."  
 
The next morning this resolution was found written or 'painted  
on the wall in front of the chapel, where it was read by all the  
students as they went in to morning prayers. The Faculty  
were soon called together to consult in this emergency. They  
felt deeply that it was a solemn crisis for themselves and for  
the College. They began their consultation by asking counsel  
of God in prayer. After much anxious deliberation they came  
to the conclusion that such action by a class in College was sub-  
versive of all government, and that the}' must meet the issue  
with firmness or resign the helm into the hands of students.  
They therefore " voted to require a confession of all the mem-  
bers of the Junior class who have taken measures inconsistent  
with their obligations to obey the laws of College, in the case  
of William O. Gorham." The confession is in the following  
words :  
 
" It being an acknowledged principle that no student who is  
permitted to enjoy the privileges of a public literary Institu-  
tion, and who has promised obedience to its laws, has a right to  
do any thing to weaken the hands of its Faculty or in any  
way to nullify any of their disciplinary acts, I deeply regret  
 
1 David N. Coburn of Thompson, Ct., now Rev. Mr. Coburn of Monson, Mass.  
At least one other member of the Class, I believe, was not at College at the time  
and took no part in these transactions, viz., Edward Blodgett of Amherst, now Rev.  
Mr. Blodgett of Greenwich.  
 
that in reference to the late case of William O. Gorham, I did  
without due consideration, vote for a resolution and sign a  
paper which tended to both these results ; and I hereby prom-  
ise to abstain from all similar interference in the government of  
Amherst College."  
 
The class hesitated and delayed, and it seemed for a time, as  
if the whole class would refuse to sign the paper and be sent  
away. But by the interposition of friends of Gorham who were  
also friends of the College, 1 he was induced to sign the confes-  
sion required of him with a trifling verbal alteration, and then  
statement of the facts in this unhappy affair. I have made it  
almost without note or comment, believing that my readers will  
prefer to make their own comments and draw their own conclu-  
sions. It would be easy, perhaps, for any of us to say what we  
would do now in such a case as this, or that of the Anti-Slavery  
excitement. Doubtless we should open the doors wide to the  
discussion of slavery or any similar question, and let the wind  
How through. Probably we should let a class not only have  
their own opinions in regard to a case of discipline, but express  
them, if they choose, to the friends of the person disciplined.  
But it is not so easy to say what we would have done, or what  
the Faculty would or should have done under all the circum-  
stances as they existed then. In the state of the public mind  
as it then was, and with the views of College government which  
then prevailed, probably almost any Faculty would have taken  
he was not here at the time of the Anti-Slavery excitement, and at the time of the  
Gorham excitement, having just entered upon his professorship, he did not feel  
competent or called to take a leading part. He was only able, as lie remembers  
 
cumstauces, almost any class would probably have acted in es-  
sentially the same way as the Class of '38. Certainly no class  
ever had a better reputation for good order, obedience to law,  
and faithfulness in study, than they had prior to this excite-  
ment. Indeed they suspected the Faculty, unjustly of course,  
of presuming upon this very characteristic to treat them with  
more severity and trample them under foot. Doubtless there  
were errors and mistakes on both sides, and it was an unfor-  
tunate affair for all concerned. The young man has gone wan-  
dering and flaming like a comet through the world, pretty much  
as he did through College. The members of the class felt the  
sting through the remainder of their course, and wear the scar  
to this day. They are loyal sons of their mother, but many of  
them have never ceased to feel that they were treated unjustly  
and unwisely by the government. The class above them sym-  
pathized and suffered more or less with them, and the most bril-  
liant man and scholar in it, who fanned the flame of prejudice  
and passion, not to say of insubordination and rebellion by his  
eloquence in the debates of the class-room, and was censured  
for it, never recovered from the twist which he then received, 1  
ment and lays bare some of its secret springs : " The vexed  
question of College appointments, a complaint which seems to  
have become periodically chronic, took an epidemic form in the  
years 1835-6-7. A society was organized in College, pledged  
not to perform parts assigned them at Junior Exhibitions and  
Commencements, on the ground that the system being morally  
wrong, they could not conscientiously do so As the prov-  
ince of conscience has different limits in different minds, the  
circumstances attending the urging of this plea, became some-  
times somewhat amusing. I once asked a classmate whether he  
should accept an appointment at the coming Commencement.  
He said he was undecided. If he had an oration, he thought  
 
1 How far the twist may have been in the grain, and how far owing to circum-  
stances in both these cases, the writer can not say. Probably there was something  
 
he should ; otherwise not. I do not suppose that all consciences  
were equally elastic, but the cause of conscientious scruples  
was losing ground, and the leaders of the movement seemed to  
feel that unless Sumter were bombarded, the ardor of coadjutors  
would cool. Accordingly an appointment for Junior Exhibition  
was declined by one, who if he has not by his act rendered his  
name immortal, has at least given it ' a bad pre-eminence,' who,  
in a note couched in terms at least unnecessarily offensive, and  
in an interview with the President, used language which I have  
elsewhere characterized as abusive. 1 I so characterize it, having  
heard him relate to classmates what he had just said to the  
President, and witnessed the animus with which the 'Good!  
good ! ' was uttered as the most offensive expressions were re-  
peated, his auditors, with the exception of myself, being in  
Alecto and her imps were almost visibly present. Many of the  
class above them were infected, and received the same prescrip-  
tion, (an apology.) Some of them yielded as soon as they had  
time for cool reflection. One classmate, after signing the re-  
quired apology, said to me, ' I do not see how I could ever have  
regarded the requirement as unreasonable. Not half enough has  
been required. I have done wrong and shall never feel at ease  
until I have made a fuller confession.' He accordingly sought  
an interview with the President to make such a confession as  
would relieve him of his burden. . . . Returning to their friends,  
they (the disaffected students,) infused into the whole commu-  
nity something of their own bitterness of feeling towards a  
College, which up to that time, had been steadily strengthening  
its hold upon the public confidence and steadily gaining in num-  
bers. It was the severest blow the College has ever received, a  
magnanimity of President Humphrey who insisted that the language addressed to  
him should not be taken into consideration in the discipline, because it was ad-  
dressed to him not officially, but as an individual.  
 
The effect on the College was immediately disastrous. From  
this time class after class went out with more or less of the  
spirit of disaffection, and spread it through the community.  
Year after year too many of the graduates went forth not to in-  
vite and attract students, but to turn them away by reporting  
that the government was arbitrary, the President stern, severe,  
unsympathizing, unprogressive, and even in his dotage, (though  
as Dr. Hitchcock remarks, 1 his subsequent history shows that he  
was as well qualified, physically, intellectually and spiritually as  
he had ever been for the place,) and the Professors, some of them  
at least, incapable, unpopular and unfit for the office, (although  
able administration the College had risen to such unexampled  
prosperity. The Professors were, for the most part, the same men  
under whose government and instruction the Institution had pre-  
viously prospered, who, when the tide turned afterwards, were as  
popular as it often falls to the lot of faithful Professors to be, and  
whose lives have become identified with the history of the Col-  
lege. It is not necessary to mention their names. The Tutors  
of this period were some of the best scholars that have ever  
been graduated here. Not a few of them have since become  
distinguished as educators, authors, men of science, eloquent  
preachers and able jurists. Six of them have been Professors  
in this and other Institutions, viz., Charles B. Adams, Thomas  
P. Field, John Humphrey, William A. Peabody, Roswell D.  
Hitchcock and George B. Jewett. It was during this period  
that the Graeca Majora was dropped from the curriculum, and  
Homer, Demosthenes, and the Tragic poets began to be read  
continuously as entire books instead of extracts, and the Greek  
and Latin languages were for the first time taught analytically  
in their relation to each other and their cognate tongues and  
in the light of comparative philology. At this time, to wit, in  
1837-8, the whole system of monitorial duties, excuses for ab-  
 
was revised, reformed, methodized, made at once more just and  
more efficient, and those principles and rules established which,  
not without amendment of course, but substantially, have regu-  
lated the practice of the College in this important matter ever  
since. A circular letter was also prepared and sent to the  
parents of Freshmen and other new students, which explained  
the temptations and dangers of College life, invited the co-oper-  
ation of parents and friends, and thus contributed much towards  
a better understanding among all the parties concerned in the  
education and training of the College. Such a letter continued  
to be sent with good effect for many years after the emergency  
out of which it sprung had passed away. About the same  
time, a course of general lectures in the chapel on study, read-  
ing, literature and College life, was inaugurated, in which all  
the Faculty in rotation bore a part, and which proved highly ac-  
ceptable as well as useful to the students. In short, necessity  
proved the mother of invention and sharpened the wits of the  
Faculty to discover and apply many new ways and means of  
promoting the welfare of the students, and, if possible, the  
prosperity of the College. These efforts, it is believed, were  
appreciated by the under-graduates, and they were quite con-  
tented and satisfied with the government and instruction of the  
College. But the spirit of disaffection was still spreading among  
the alumni, infecting some of the older as well as the younger  
graduates, and extending through the community; and the  
number of students still continued to decrease.  
 
A more thorough system of term and annual examinations was  
introduced, which were attended by distinguished scholars, friends  
and patrons from abroad, at the invitation of the Faculty ; and  
these examining committees often published most flattering re-  
ports of the internal condition of the College. But they were  
sometimes overdone, and it may be doubted whether they did  
not do more harm than good. The number of students still  
continued to diminish.  
 
At the call of a committee appointed by the Amherst alumni  
at Andover, in 1841, a large number of graduates convened at  
 
service to the College. Measures were taken at this first meet-  
ing for establishing and helping to raise an endowment for an  
alumni professorship, and resolutions were passed expressing  
" sympathy with the founders and friends of Amherst College  
in the present embarrassed state of its affairs," " confidence in  
the wisdom and energy of the Board of Trustees," and " pledging  
earnest co-operation in all appropriate ways for its relief." But  
it was rather a stormy meeting a squally and threatening one,  
at least painful in many of its aspects to the Trustees and  
Faculty, the general agent and the best friends of the Institu-  
tion, and boding ill quite as much as good in its future history.  
 
At length the feeling of discontent and dissatisfaction began  
to find expression through the press. The causes of the decline  
of the College were discussed in newspapers and pamphlets,  
and writers who were confessedly graduates and professedly  
friends of the Institution, published to the world that the  
alumni were dissatisfied with the management of the College,  
and it never would prosper without a thorough reform, not to  
say a complete revolution. Those were dark days for Amherst  
College days of cruel trial and suffering for its officers. The  
trial of living on a half-salary a few years later was nothing in  
comparison. Some of them carried the sting of it to their dying  
day, and it still lingers in the memory of the survivors.  
 
If the College had been rich and independent, it might have  
borne this trial. Indeed if the College had been independent,  
it would have been saved the greater part of the trial, for com-  
plaints would then have been in a great measure silenced, and  
disaffection nipped in the bud. But " the destruction of the  
poor is their poverty." Poverty increased the disaffection  
itself as well as sharpened the sting of it, and the disaffection,  
by diminishing the number of students, increased the poverty  
of the College. For it had not at this time a single dollar of  
endowment, 1 and no College, however large or prosperous, re-  
ceives for tuition one-half of what it costs. The two subscrip-  
tions which had already been raised, the one of thirty thousand  
and the other of fifty thousand dollars, were immediately  
exhausted in the payment of debts and other unavoidable  
 
1 The Charity Fund went wholly for the support of beneficiaries.  
 
expenses. The College was, therefore, actually running in debt  
at the time of its largest prosperity, and the debt went on in-  
creasing as the number of students continued to diminish, till  
the outgoes exceeded the income by fully four thousand dollars  
a year.  
 
Application was made to the Legislature for pecuniary .aid in  
three successive years, viz., 1837, 1838 and 1839. In each in-  
stance, a Joint Committee of both Houses reported strongly in  
favor of the College, and recommended in 1837 a grant of twenty-  
five thousand dollars in ten annual installments, in 1838 a grant  
of fifty thousand dollars, and in 1839 a reference to the next  
Legislature on the ground that there were then no funds in the  
treasury. The report in 1837, by Hon. Myron Lawrence of  
Belchertown, then a member of the Senate and the next year  
President of the same body, was particularly able and cordial.  
The following passages are worthy of notice and record : "Their  
present buildings will accommodate one hundred and eighty stu-  
dents, and they are in want of another building to accommodate  
sixty more. It is indispensable to the best good of the students  
as well as to the reputation of the College and the correct ad-  
ministration of its affairs, that all its inmates should reside un-  
der the immediate care and oversight of the Faculty.  
 
" Before the establishment of this Institution, great numbers  
of young men went out of the Commonwealth for education.  
In 1824 there were in the several New England Colleges, out  
of this State, two hundred and twenty-seven scholars belonging  
to Massachusetts. In 1830, the number was reduced to one  
hundred and thirty-five. At the former period there were fifty-  
eight more went out of the State than came into it, and at the  
latter, fourteen more came in than went out. This Institution  
has been the chief instrument in producing these results.  
 
" Massachusetts is pre-eminent among her sister States for her  
munificent bequests to literary institutions. To Harvard Uni-  
versity she has given three hundred thousand dollars ; to Wil-  
liams College, fifty-six thousand dollars ; to Bowdoin College,  
seventy thousand dollars ; to Academies six hundred and thirty  
thousand dollars ; to other institutions, twelve thousand dollars ;  
to common schools one million dollars, making in all the gener-  
 
ous sum of two million and seventy thousand dollars. Amherst  
College, with its high claims to legislative bounty and its abun-  
to control it, and also to choose five out of seventeen Trustees  
and supply the vacancies of these five as often as they shall oc-  
cur forever." In the report of 1837, the debt of the College is  
ing rejected in the latter year by a vote of 154 nays to 132 ayes.  
It is worthy of note as illustrating the change of public senti-  
ment in Hampshire County in comparison with former Legisla-  
tures, that only one negative vote was now cast in the whole  
county. In 1839 the petition was referred to the next Legis-  
lature as recommended by the committee.  
 
Despairing of aid from the State, the Trustees soon conceived  
the project of raising one hundred thousand dollars by private  
subscription. This was thought to be the smallest sum that  
would relieve the College of existing embarrassments and leave  
a balance for endowments sufficient to make the income equal  
to expenditures. Rev. William Tyler, of South Hadley Falls,  
was first appointed an agent for obtaining subscriptions, and by  
his labors at different times during the years 1839 and 1840,  
some four or five thousand dollars were raised, chiefly in Am-  
herst. At the annual meeting of the Trustees in the latter year,  
it being thought that the shortening of the winter vacation had  
operated unfavorably by keeping away that class of students  
who were necessitated to help themselves by teaching, the va-  
cations were changed back again to six weeks in the winter,  
two in the spring, and four in the summer, the Commencement,  
however, being placed on the fourth Thursday of July instead  
of the fourth Wednesday of August. But the number of stu-  
 
In 1841 the eyes of all turned to Rev. Joseph Vaill, who had  
already proved himself a firm support and a successful agent of  
the College in more than one emergency, as the only person who  
could successfully perform the herculean labor of raising the  
money which was indispensable to its very existence. The debts  
of the College had now reached an aggregate of fifteen thousand  
dollars, and were increasing at the rate of three or four thousand  
dollars every year. Mr. Vaill well knew, although not so well  
as he did afterwards, the disaffection that was spreading among  
the alumni, the complaints that were circulating through the  
community, and the almost insurmountable obstacles that stood  
in the way of the success of the enterprise. He had just returned  
from Portland to his former people in Brimfield with the pur-  
pose of spending the remainder of his da}"s where he was first  
settled in the ministry. But he could not hesitate when the  
very existence of the College of which he had been a Trustee  
from the beginning, was trembling in the balance. He accepted  
the ofrbe of general agent to which he had been invited by the  
Trustees at their annual meeting in 1841, with the same salary  
as the Professors, was dismissed from his pastoral charge, re-  
moved to Amherst, and for nearly four years devoted himself to  
unwearied labors and plans for the external affairs and especially  
the pecuniary interests of the College. In August, 1845, he  
was able to report subscriptions, conditional and unconditional,  
to the amount of sixty-seven thousand dollars, of which over  
fifty-one thousand dollars had been collected by himself and  
paid into the treasury. 1 By reckoning in ten thousand dollars,  
given during this time by David Sears, eleven thousand dollars  
known by him to have been bequeathed by will to the College  
during the same time, and fifteen thousand dollars which he had  
the written assurance of an individual's "full intention " to pay  
for the founding of a professorship, the sum of one hundred  
 
1 Three years after the close of his agency, in August, 1848, Dr. Vaill reported  
four thousand four hundred and thirty-three dollars more as collected by himself,  
(making an aggregate of nearly fifty l six thousand dollars collected by himself,)  
three thousand seven hundred and seventy-six dollars besides the principal of the  
Sears' fund as having come directly into the treasury meanwhile, and two thousand  
 
thousand dollars was made up, and this statement was so far  
satisfactory to the subscribers that the majority of those whose  
subscriptions had been conditioned on the raising of the entire  
sum of one hundred thousand dollars, now made them uncon-  
ditional.  
 
But deduct from the fifty-one thousand dollars which had  
been actually paid into the treasury by Mr. Vaill at the close  
of his agency in 1845, the debt which was reported to the Legisla-  
ture as fifteen thousand dollars in 1838, 1 the excess of the outgoes  
above the income in the interval of seven years at the rate of  
three or four thousand dollars a year, and the salary and ex-  
penses of the agent, which exceeded four thousand dollars, and  
it will be seen that very little remained for endowments or even  
to counterbalance a future excess of expenses. And yet the  
annual expenses far exceeded the annual income, and the num-  
ber of students still continued to diminish. Things could not  
long go on in this way. To raise money by subscription was  
only to throw it into a bottomless morass which must after all  
before long swallow up the Institution. This was palpable to  
all eyes, and was uttered from the lips of many. The Trustees  
felt it. They chose a Standing Committee of Retrenchment.  
They reduced the number of Tutors, formerly four, to one.  
With their consent, they deducted one hundred dollars each  
from the salary of the President and the general agent, and two  
hundred from that of each of the Professors. But all this was  
quite inadequate. The College still continued to flounder and  
sink deeper in the mire. The general agent at length saw that  
the only adequate remedy was to bring the expenses within the  
revenue ; and he laid before the Faculty the suggestion with an  
outline of the plan, which was adopted by them and ere long  
turned the tide in the opposite direction.  
 
But before this remedy was tried or, perhaps, thought of, the  
clamor had become loud and distinct among the alumni and in  
the community for changes in the Faculty and a change of ad-  
ministration. The first officer who was sacrificed was Prof.  
Fowler, a gentleman of much learning and many accomplish-  
 
1 Twelve thousand dollars in 1839, No one seems to have known just what it  
was.  
 
merts, but "unpopular" and, as the students said who certainly  
had the means of testing his capacity in this respect, unable to  
maintain order in his lectures, recitations and rhetorical exercises.  
Under the double pressure of the clamor of graduates and the  
complaints of under-graduates, he resigned his professorship to  
the Trustees at a special meeting in December, 1842. l  
 
But this did not appease the clamor or meet the emergency.  
A more shining mark was aimed at. A more costly sacrifice  
was demanded. And at a special meeting of the corporation in  
Worcester, in January, 1844, with the Trustees all present, under  
the pressure of the emergency, and doubtless in anticipation of  
the event, President Humphrey tendered his resignation, to take  
effect whenever his successor should be ready to enter upon the  
office.  
 
The magnanimity of the spirit in which Dr. Humphrey met  
this trying emergency will be seen from the letter in which he  
tendered his resignation, which was entered upon the records of  
the meeting, and which we here copy entire.  
 
" To the Reverend and Honorable Board of Trustees of Amherst  
College, Gentlemen : I avail myself of the opportunity which  
your special meeting affords, to resign the office of President  
which I have so long held, into your hands, the resignation to  
take effect as soon as a successor can be brought in to fill my  
place.  
 
" It is now almost twenty-one years since, in compliance with  
your call, I tore myself away from a beloved pastoral charge  
and assumed the labors and responsibilities of the office, which,  
though often invited to relinquish for other fields of labor, I have  
not felt at liberty to resign till now.  
 
" Permit me, gentlemen, in closing this brief communieation,  
to tender you my sincere thanks for the generous partiality with  
which you have looked upon my imperfect endeavors to ad-  
vance the literary and religious interests of the College, and  
for the unwavering confidence with which you have always sus-  
 
1 The resignation to take effect at the end of the collegiate year. The Trustees  
accepted the resignation on these terms, passed a vote of " entire confidence in his  
fidelity, assiduity and urbanity in the discharge of his duties," and voted to allow  
him the half of a year's salary in addition to the stated annual salary.  
 
tained me in the discharge of my duties. This confidence, let  
me assure you, has, on my part, been warmly reciprocated and  
will be gratefully remembered.  
 
" We have consulted, and toiled, and prayed together for its  
prosperity under the smiles of heaven, though often brought to  
a stand by its pecuniary embarrassments ; and I can not allow  
myself to doubt that, under your wise and energetic administra-  
tion, it will rise from its present depression, and, in generations  
to come, more than realize to the church, to the commonwealth,  
and to the perishing heathen, the richest benedictions so fer-  
vently supplicated by its pious founders. It was a noble enter-  
prise. It has been eminently blessed, and it will be blessed,  
provided the Divine favor is not forfeited by the unbelief and  
wherever my lot may be cast during the short remnant of my  
life, you will have my sympathies and best wishes in the guard-  
ianship of the beloved Institution with which I have been so  
gentlemen, your obedient servant, HEMAN HUMPHREY."  
 
The Trustees, constrained by a felt necessity and doubtless  
with sorrowing hearts, accepted the resignation, and through a  
committee consisting of Mr. Calhoun, Dr. Nelson and Dr. Alden,  
returned the following answer:  
 
" Resolved, as the unanimous sense of this Board that Dr.  
Humphrey retires from the Presidency of the College with our  
sincere respect and affection which have been steadily increas-  
ing from the commencement of our mutual intercourse ; that we  
express to him our gratitude for his invaluable services as the  
head of this Institution, our highest regard for his character as  
a successful teacher, a faithful pastor and a single-hearted Chris-  
tian ; that our prayers will accompany him, that his rich intel-  
 
of his fellow-men ; and that we invoke upon him the continued  
favor and blessing of heaven.  
 
" Resolved, that one thousand dollars be presented to Dr.  
Humphrey on his retirement in addition to -his regular salary."  
 
The first gleam of sunshine from without which had rested  
upon the College for several years, dawned upon it in the dark-  
ness and sorrow of this meeting at Worcester in the donation  
of ten thousand dollars by Hon. David Sears of Boston, which  
was the beginning of his munificent " Foundation of Literature  
and Benevolence," and not only the largest donation, but the  
first donation of any considerable magnitude that had ever been  
given at once by a single individual.  
 
But the College was not yet lifted out of the mire. That was  
to be the result of many years- of wise and patient self-denial  
and labor. Two vacancies in the Faculty had at length been  
created. Now began the more difficult task of filling them. At  
the same meeting in Worcester at which they had accepted the  
resignation of Dr. Humphrey, the Trustees chose Prof. E. A.  
Park of Andover, President, and re-appointed Rev. J. B. Condit  
of Portland, Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory, together with  
the pastoral charge 6f the College church. But both of these  
gentlemen declined their appointments. At the next annual  
meeting in August, 1844, the Trustees chose Rev. Prof. George  
Shepard of Bangor, President, and Rev. Jonathan Leavitt of  
Providence, Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory, together with  
the pastoral charge of the College church. Prof. Shepard de-  
clined the presidency. Rev. Mr. Leavitt so far accepted the  
Professorship as to call a council to consider the question of his  
dismission ; but the council declined to dismiss him simply be-  
cause he did not press it, and it was generally understood that  
he did not press it because on visiting Amherst his heart failed  
him in view of the difficulties which beset the College.  
 
At this meeting, Hon. William B. Banister and Hon. Alfred  
D. Foster resigned their places as members of the Board. Henry  
Edwards, Esq., of Boston was elected in the place of Mr. Ban-  
ister. At the urgent request of the Board, Mr. Foster con-  
sented to withdraw his resignation. But a correspondence  
 
a later day with Prof. Hitchcock show that he had little hope  
that the College could be maintained as anything more than an  
Academy.  
 
At a special meeting of the corporation in Amherst in No-  
fessors laid before the Trustees the proposition, suggested prob-  
ably by Mr. Vaill, that they would accept the income of the Col-  
lege, be the same more or less, in place of their salaries, and pay  
out of it also all the necessary running expenses of the College,  
on condition that they be allowed to regulate these expenses and  
run the College, and with the understanding that the agency  
for the solicitation of funds should cease, and with the expecta-  
tion that Prof. Hitchcock would be appointed President.' The  
Trustees accepted the proposition of the Faculty as modified  
and set forth by themselves, and on this basis, they elected Rev.  
Edward Hitchcock, LL.D., President and Professor of Natural  
Theology and Geology. In order to provide for the partial va-  
cancy thus created in Prof. Hitchcock's department, they at the  
same time elected Prof. Charles U. Shepard of New Haven,  
Professor of Chemistry and Natural History, " to take effect  
provided Prof. Hitchcock accepts the Presidency."  
 
These appointments were all accepted, and on the 14th of  
April, 1845, the President elect was inducted into his office, the  
retiring President, at the request of the Trustees, performing  
the ceremony of induction and in due form handing over the  
keys to his successor, the former having previously delivered a  
farewell address, and the latter following with his inaugural.  
It would have been the personal preference of Dr. Humphrey  
to continue in office till Commencement, and thus at the close  
of the year and amid the concourse of alumni and friends usu-  
ally convened on that occasion, to take leave of his " beloved  
College" and her sons, so many of whom loved and honored  
him as a father. But it was thought by friends of the "new  
departure" that the delay might embarrass the financial ar-  
 
hastened to put off the robes of office and with his own hands  
to put them upon his successor. In his farewell address he  
says : " The period having arrived, when, by the conditions of  
my resignation, I am to retire from the responsible post which I  
have occupied for twenty-two years, it was my wish silently to  
withdraw with many thanksgivings to God for his smiles upon  
the Institution, with which I have been so long connected, and  
fervent supplications for its future prosperity. But having been  
kindly and somewhat earnestly requested by the Standing Com-  
mittee of the Board, to prepare an address for the present oc-  
casion, I have allowed myself to be overruled, I hope not for  
the first time, by a sense of public duty. It has been a maxim  
with me, for more than forty years, that every man is bound to  
avail himself of all such opportunities for doing good as Provi-  
dence may afford him, with but a subordinate regard to his own  
personal feelings or convenience." He then proceeds to narrate  
concisely the history of the College from the beginning, espe-  
cially its religious history, insisting with great earnestness and  
eloquence as he did in his inaugural, on a truly Christian edu-  
cation in truly Christian Colleges as the hope of the country,  
the church and the world, and closes with devout aspirations,  
with almost apostolic benedictions on the College and its be-  
loved church, its honored Trustees and guardians, his respected  
and beloved associates in the immediate government and in-  
struction, the beloved youth over whose morals, health and  
education it had been his endeavor to watch with paternal so-  
licitude, and the esteemed friend and brother to whom he re-  
signed the chair, and with whom he had been so long and so  
happily associated. There is an almost tragic pathos and sub-  
limity in these valedictory words and last acts in the public life  
of this great and good man. Few scenes in history, or the drama  
even, have in them more of the moral sublime. The sympa-  
thizing spectators hardly knew whether to weep over the sad  
necessities which environed the close of his administration or  
to admire and rejoice in the moral grandeur and Christian her-  
oism of the man. And the feelings of the writer in narrating  
these events have been somewhat the same as those with which  
the disciples of Socrates listened to his last conversations, as  
 
Plato describes them, in the Phaedon, " feelings not of pity, for  
they thought him more to be envied than pitied, nor yet of  
pleasure, such as they usually experienced when listening to his  
philosophical discourses, but a wonderful sort of emotion, a  
strange mixture of pleasure and grief, and a singular union and  
succession of smiles and tears."  
 
