CHAPTER IV.  
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE CHAEITY FUND THE CONVENTION AT  
AMHERST IN 1818.  
 
IN view of the elevated literary and Christian character of  
Amherst Academy, and its extraordinary success as described in  
the foregoing chapter, it is not surprising that its founders soon  
felt themselves called upon to make higher and larger provision  
for educational purposes. At the annual meeting of the Board  
of Trustees, on the 18th of November, 1817, a project formed  
by Rufus Graves, Esq., was adopted for increasing the useful-  
ness of the Academy, by raising a fund for the gratuitous in-  
struction of "indigent young men of promising talents and  
hopeful piety, who shall manifest a desire to obtain a liberal  
education with a sole view to the Christian ministry."  
 
" Taking into consideration the local situation of this Acad-  
and Christian, as well as literary and scientific purposes, for  
which the Academy was founded, and the success, beyond the  
most sanguine expectation, which, in pursuance of these objects,  
and under the guidance of a propitious Providence, it had  
already achieved. It insists also, in detail, upon the advan-  
tages of the location, "in an elevated and healthy situation, in  
the centre of an extensive and wealthy population of good  
moral habits, where the means of living are as cheap and as  
easily obtained as in any part of this Commonwealth, and com-  
pletely insulated from any institution embracing similar prin-  
 
1 95  
 
ciples.  
Influenced by such considerations, " encouraged by the past  
 
and animated by the prospects of the future, humbly and devot-  
edly "relying on the Divine assistance in all their 'endeavors to  
promote the cause of truth, and train up the rising generation  
in science and virtue," the Trustees " do humbly resolve as an  
important object of this Board, to establish in this Institution  
for the principles aforesaid, a professorship of languages with a  
permanent salary equal to the importance and dignity of such  
an office, and that Rufus Graves, Joshua Crosby, John Fiske,  
Nathaniel Smith and Samuel F. Dickinson, be a committee to  
solicit donations, contributions, grants and bequests, to establish  
a fund for that and other benevolent objects of the Institution."  
 
The committee entered with zeal and alacrity upon the effort  
to raise money for the endowment of such a professorship, and  
prosecuted it for several months. Their ardent and indefatiga-  
ble chairman, Col. Graves, went to Boston and other large  
towns, and labored day and night to accomplish the object.  
But " they found," in the language of Mr. Webster's narrative  
of the proceedings, "that the establishment of a single profess-  
orship was too limited an object to induce men to subscribe.  
To engage public patronage, it was found necessary to form a  
plan for the education of young men for the ministry on a more  
extensive scale."  
 
These considerations determined the committee to enlarge  
their plan, and to aim not merely at the endowment of a pro-  
fessorship in the Academy, but at the raising of a fund which  
should be the basis of a separate Institution of a higher grade.  
They accordingly framed and reported a " constitution and sys-  
tem of by-laws for raising and managing a permanent Charity  
Fund as the basis of an Institution in Amherst, in the county  
of Hampshire, for the classical education of indigent young  
men of piety and talents, for the Christian ministry." The  
Board of Trustees at their meeting on the 18th of August, 1818,  
unanimously accepted this report, approved the doings of the  
committee, and authorized them to take such measures and com-  
municate with such persons and corporations as they might  
judge expedient.  
 
The fund which was thus inaugurated, became the corner-  
stone of the Charity Institution and " the sheet-anchor " of  
 
the College so it was often called by the Professors and friends  
of the College amid the storms which it afterwards encountered.  
And no document sheds so much light on the motives of the  
founders of the Institution as this constitution of the Charity  
Fund. It therefore merits careful consideration.  
 
The instrument was drawn by " Rufus Graves, Esq.," as Mr.  
Webster habitually styles him better known to the pub-  
lic as " Col. Graves." The preamble is as follows : " Taking  
into consideration the deplorable condition of a large portion  
of our race who are enveloped in the most profound ignorance,  
and superstition and gross idolatry ; and many of them in a  
savage state without a written language ; together with vast  
multitudes in Christian countries of which our own affords a  
lamentable specimen, who are dispersed over extensive territo-  
ries, as sheep without a shepherd ; impressed with a most fer-  
vent commiseration for our destitute brethren, and urged by the  
command of our Divine Saviour to preach the gospel to every  
creature ; we have resolved to consecrate to the Author of all  
good, for the honor of his name and the benefit of our race, a  
portion of the treasure or inheritance which he has been pleased  
to entrust to our stewardship, in the firm belief that ' it is more  
blessed to give than to receive.' "  
 
" Under the conviction that the education of pious young  
men of the finest talents in the community is the most sure  
method of relieving our brethren by civilizing and evangelizing  
the world, and that a classical institution judiciously located and  
richly endowed with a large and increasing charitable fund, in  
and system of by-laws for the raising and managing of the fund.  
The constitution is drawn up in due form as a legal document, 1  
with much minuteness of detail, and with every possible safe-  
guard against the loss or perversion of the fund, or the neglect'  
 
1 Col. Graves consulted Jeremiah Mason and Daniel Webster as to the legal char-  
acter of the constitution, and they both said it was a legal instrument, binding in  
law on the subscribers; and so it was decided by the Supreme Court, when, for the  
sake of testing it, one of the subscribers refused to pay.  
 
of duty on the part of those who are charged with the care and  
management of it. The first article fixes the location of the In-  
stitution at Amherst, and provides for the incorporation of Wil-  
liams College with it, should it continue to be thought expe-  
dient, to remove that Institution to the county of Hampshire,  
and to locate it in the town of Amherst. The second article  
contains a promise of the subscribers to pay the sums annexed  
to their names for the purpose of raising a permanent fund, to  
the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars, as the basis of a  
fund for the proposed Institution, provided that, in case the sums  
subscribed in the course of one year shall not amount to the full  
sum of fifty thousand dollars, then the whole, or any part, shall  
be void according to the will of any subscriber on giving three  
months' notice. The third provides that five-sixths of the inter-  
est of the fund shall be forever appropriated to the classical ed-  
ucation in the Institution of indigent pious young men for the  
ministry, and the other sixth shall be added to the principal for  
its perpetual increase, while the principal itself shall be secured  
intangible and perpetually augmenting. Article fourth directs  
that the property of the fund shall be secured by real estate or  
invested in funds of Massachusetts, or the United States, or some  
other safe public stocks. Article fifth vests the management  
and appropriation of the fund, according to the provisions of the  
constitution and by-laws, in the Trustees of Amherst Academy,  
until the contemplated classical Institution is established and  
incorporated, and then in the Board of Trustees of said Institu-  
tion and their successors forever. Article sixth provides for the  
appointment of a Board of Overseers of the fund, a skillful  
Financier and an Auditor. Article seventh requires the Trustees  
to appoint a Financier who shall be sworn to the faithful discharge  
of his duty, under sufficient bonds, and subject to be removed  
at their discretion. This Financier, however, shall not be their  
own Treasurer, that is, the Treasurer of the Institution, who  
shall be ineligible to that office. This article also prescribes the  
duties of the Trustees in regard to the fund, such as examining  
candidates for its charities, keeping a correct record of the  
amount of the fund, the manner in which it is invested and se-  
cured, their receipts and disbursements from it, and all their  
 
proceedings in reference to it. Article eighth prescribes mi-  
nutely the duties of the Financier in receiving and investing  
moneys, managing and guarding the fund, paying over the inter-  
est, as provided in article third, into the treasury of the Institu-  
tion, taking triplicate receipts, one to keep for his own security,  
one to deposit with the Secretary of the Board of Trustees, and  
the third with the Auditor ; keeping an accurate account of the  
whole fund and every part of it, and reporting the same annu-  
ally to the Board of Trustees. The ninth article provides that  
the Financier shall be paid from the avails of the fund a rea-  
sonable sum for his services and responsibility. The tenth pre-  
scribes the manner in which the Overseers of the Fund shall be  
appointed and perpetuated, viz.: the four highest subscribers  
to the fund shall appoint each of them one, and the other three  
shall be elected by a majority of the votes of the other sub-  
scribers who may assemble for that purpose. Then the Board  
shall perpetuate their existence as such by filling their own va-  
cancies. In case the Board shall at any future time become  
extinct, the Governor and Council of this Commonwealth are  
expressly authorized to appoint a new Board. Article eleventh  
provides for the appointment of an Auditor by the Board of  
Overseers, and prescribes at great length the duties of that  
Board. They are required to visit the Institution at its annual  
Commencement, to receive and examine the reports of the Trust-  
ees and the Auditor, and to inspect the records, files and vouch-  
ers of the Trustees and the Financier, and in view of all the  
facts, to decide whether the fund has been skillfully managed,  
and its avails faithfully applied according to the will of the do-  
nors. "The sacred nature of the trust reposed in the said  
Board of Overseers, as the representatives of the rights of the  
dead as well as the living, urges upon them the imperious duty  
of investigating every subject relative to their important trust."  
In case of any alleged breach of trust or questions of rights and  
powers that may arise between the Board of Trustees and the  
Board of Overseers, it is provided that the question shall be sub-  
mitted to the Honorable Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court  
of Massachusetts, whose decision shall be final, and shall be  
entered on the records of both Boards. The Board of Over-  
 
seers are required to keep a record of all their proceedings, and  
also to receive and preserve manuscript copies of the records  
and copies of the files of the Board of Trustees, that the whole  
of the records of the Institution may be safely preserved in the  
archives of both Boards. Article twelfth prescribes the duties  
of the Auditor. Article thirteenth provides for the amendment  
of the constitution and system of b}*-laws by the concurrent  
action of the Board of Trustees and the Board of Overseers,  
" so, however, as not to deviate from the original object of civil-  
izing and evangelizing the world by the classical education of  
indigent young men of piety and talents," "nor without the  
loss or destruction of this constitution by any wicked design, by 1  
fire, or by the ravages of time, it shall be the duty of the Trust-  
ees of said Institution, as soon as the aforesaid sum of fifty  
thousand dollars shall be hereunto subscribed, to cause triplicate  
copies of the same, together with the names of the subscribers  
and the sum subscribed annexed to each name, to be taken fairly  
written on vellum, one of which to be preserved in the archives  
of said Institution, one in the archives of said Board of Over-  
seers, and the other in the archives of this Commonwealth.  
And in case of the loss or destruction of either of said copies,  
its deficiency shall be immediately supplied by an attested copy  
from one of the others."  
 
In reviewing this important document, we can not but be im-  
pressed with the conviction that its authors were men not only  
of warm hearts and high religious aims, but of large views, en-  
lightened minds, far-seeing intellects and conscientious purposes,  
capable of adapting means to ends, and expecting to accomplish  
the grandest results only by wise plans and corresponding exer-  
tions men who felt that they were laying foundations for the  
glory of God and the good of mankind in future ages, and re-  
solved to prevent, so far as human foresight could, the removal  
of a single stone from those foundations, intent especially on  
guarding the corner-stone against the possibility of disturbance.  
 
courage and holy boldness, no one has ever denied. If any  
proof were necessary, it would be found even to demonstration  
in the very fact that they dared to undertake such an enterprise  
in that age, and not only undertook, but achieved it. It was  
another thing to raise a permanent fund of fifty thousand dol-  
lars for a literary institution in that day from what it is in our  
day. It would be easier to raise half a million or a million now.  
It is a common affair now. Then, nothing of the kind had ever  
been attempted. It was an original idea, and a grand one, and  
a bold one. It seemed like audacity and presumption. But its  
grandeur and boldness were among the chief secrets of success.  
The professorship in an Academy failed because it was too small  
to attract and inspire. The Charity Fund and the College were  
born of the boldness which, in brave and believing souls, sprung  
from that failure, and which knew no such word as fail.  
 
In order to secure the approval and co-operation of the  
Christian community to an extent commensurate with the mag-  
nitude of the undertaking, the Trustees of Amherst Academy,  
at a meeting held on the 10th of September, 1818, resolved to  
call a Convention of " the Congregational and Presbyterian  
clergy of the several parishes in the counties of Hampshire,  
Franklin and Hampden and the western section of the county  
of Worcester, with their delegates, together with one delegate  
from each vacant parish, and the subscribers to the fund." In  
the circular calling the Convention, the committee, consisting of  
Noah Webster, John Fiske and Rufus Graves, speak of the  
magnitude of the object, viz. : the establishment of a charitable  
institution for the purpose of educating pious, indigent young  
men for the gospel ministry in all the branches of literature and  
science usually taught in Colleges, and the importance of the  
union of all good men in combined and vigorous exertions to mul-  
tiply the number of well-educated ministers, to supply mission-  
aries, and to furnish with pastors destitute churches and people  
in our own extended republic. With this end in view, they say,  
the Trustees have formed a constitution for a Charitable Fund  
to be the basis of such an Institution in the town of Amherst,  
and have already made such progress in procuring donations as  
 
On the 29th of September, 1818, in accordance with this  
invitation, the Convention met in the church in the west parish  
of Amherst. Thirty-seven towns 1 were represented, sixteen  
in Hampshire County, thirteen in Franklin, four in Hampden  
and four in Worcester. Most of the parishes were repre-  
sented by both a pastor and a lay delegate. Thirty-six clergy-  
men and thirty-two laymen composed the Convention. Among  
them were Rev. David Parsons, D. D., Rev. Payson Williston,  
Rev. Joshua Crosby, Rev. John Woodbridge, Rev. Joseph Ly-  
man, D. D., Rev. Vinson Gould, Rev. Dan Huntington, Rev.  
James Taylor, Rev. Theophilus Packard, Rev. John Keep, 2  
Rev. T. M. Cooley, Rev. Simeon Colton, Rev. John Fiske,  
Rev. Thomas Snell, H. Wright Strong, Esq., Col. Henry  
Dwight, Col. Joseph Billings, Dr. William Hooker, Hon.  
Joseph Lyman, George Grennell, Jr., Esq., and Roger Leavitt,  
Esq. Rev. Joseph Lyman, D. D., of Hatfield, was chosen Pres-  
ident, and Col. Joseph Billings, of Hatfield, and George Gren-  
nell, Jr., Esq., of Greenfield, Secretaries. The constitution and  
by-laws of the proposed Institution were read, and, after some  
discussion, the whole subject was referred to a committee of  
twelve. In the afternoon, a sermon was delivered before the  
Convention by Dr. Lyman. The next morning, September 30th,  
the committee presented their report. They express in strong  
language their approval of the constitution, as the fruit of much  
judicious reflection, and guarding as a legal instrument in the  
most satisfactory and effectual manner, the faithful and appro-  
priate application of the property consecrated by the donors.  
They have no hesitation in recommending Hampshire County as  
one of the most eligible situations for such an Institution, being  
in the central part of Massachusetts, in the heart of New Eng-  
land, and almost equally distant from six other Colleges, in an  
extensive section of country, salubrious, fertile and populous,  
Amherst in Hampshire, Greenfield in Franklin, and Granville in Hampden  
County.  
; 2 Afterwards one of the founders and fathers of Oberlin College.  
 
ters and churches are generally united and harmonious, and  
where the numerous streams of charity and benevolence afford  
ample assurance that an Institution of this description would be  
cordially embraced, extensively patronized and liberally sup-  
ported. In regard to the particular town in Hampshire County,  
while they thought favorably of Amherst, the committee were  
of the opinion that it would be expedient to leave that question  
to the decision of a disinterested committee appointed by the  
Convention. Accordingly they reported a series of resolutions,  
cordially approving the object of a religious and classical Insti-  
tution on a charitable foundation ; recommending also in con-  
nection with it, the establishment of a College possessing all  
the advantages of other Colleges in the Commonwealth, and that  
such preparations and arrangements be made as will accommo-  
date students at the Institution as soon as possible ; but leaving  
the location to be determined by a committee, only adding, that  
in whatever place it may be established, it is expected that the  
people of that place will show themselves worthy of such a  
privilege by affording liberal aid towards the erection of College  
buildings.  
 
The preamble of the report, expressing the general views of  
the committee, was promptly accepted by the Convention. But  
on those points in the resolutions which touched the location  
of the Institution, an animated debate arose and continued  
through the morning and afternoon sessions. Able arguments  
and eloquent appeals were made for and against fixing the site  
definitely at Amherst. Local feelings and interests doubtless  
influenced the speakers more or less on both sides of the ques-  
tion. The most violent opposition came from some of the  
churches and parishes in the immediate vicinity of Amherst.  
Several delegates from the west side of the river, including  
those from Northampton, contended ably and earnestly in favor  
of locating the Institution at Northampton. The discussion was  
carried from the Convention to the families where the members  
were entertained, and there are still living those who well re-  
member that the excitement ran so high as to disturb their sleep  
long after the hour of midnight. The people of Amherst were  
 
Business was almost suspended. The Academy 'took a recess,  
and teachers and pupils hung with breathless interest on the de-  
bate. " Until noon of the second day of the Convention," I  
use the language of one who was then a student in the Academy  
and an eye-witness, 1 " the weight of argument was in favor of  
Northampton, and things looked blue for a location in Amherst.  
The Trustees watched the progress of the debate with great  
anxiety, and were doubtful of the result of the vote, which was  
to be taken in the afternoon. Capt. Calvin Merrill, one of the  
Trustees, a man of clear and discerning mind and good judg-  
ment, but of few words, said to me at noon of that day, that he  
feared the result of the vote about to be taken, but, says he, ' I  
have just seen Esq. Dickinson,' (who had up to this time re-  
mained silent,) ' and he has promised to come in this afternoon,  
and make one of his best arguments in favor of locating in Am-  
herst.' Esq. Dickinson fulfilled his promise, taking his position  
in the aisle of the old church, and truly and faithfully laid him-  
self out, in one of the most powerful and telling speeches which  
were made on this occasion, gaining the full attention of the  
whole Convention, and no doubt greatly influencing many in  
their vote. After which, George Grennell, Esq., who was Secre-  
tary of the Convention, left his seat, taking his place in the aisle,  
and also delivered a very powerful and effective speech, still  
keeping the full attention of the Convention. These two  
speeches produced a new and different feeling throughout the  
house : and the result, when the vote was taken, was in favor  
of Amherst as a location for the College." The argument of Mr.  
Grennell, delegate from the " Poll Parish in Greenfield," was  
particularly convincing, and is said not only to have carried the  
suffrages of the Convention, but to have brought him before the  
public in so favorable a light as to have had not a little influence  
in preparing the way for his election to Congress. Rev. Timothy  
M. Cooley of Granville, in Hampden County, afterwards so famous  
as a teacher of rusticated students, is said to have spoken ably  
and earnestly in favor of a Collegiate Institution at Amherst.  
 
received the sanction of by far the greater part of the Conven-  
tion. The resolutions were so amended as to fix the location at  
Amherst, and then were passed by a large majority of votes.  
 
The enterprise was now fairly launched, and the raising of  
money was prosecuted with such zeal and success, that at the  
annual meeting of the Trustees of Amherst Academy, November  
17, 1818, the Secretary, Col. Graves, reported that the subscrip-  
tion to the Charitable Fund, together with the value of the six  
acres of land given by Col. Elijah Dickinson for the site of the  
buildings, amounted to twenty-five thousand and five hundred  
dollars. And at a special meeting in July, 1818, a committee  
appointed to examine the subscription, reported that the money  
and other property amounted, at a fair estimate, to fifty-one  
thousand four hundred and four dollars, thus making more than  
the sum proposed in less than the time allowed by the consti-  
tution.  
 
