CHAPTER XX.  
 
THE PRESIDENCY OF DR. STEARNS.  
 
WE have now reached a period whose principal actors are still  
living, and whose history can be impartially and intelligently  
written only by those who come after us. All that we shall at-  
tempt will be to sketch as briefly as possible some of its leading-  
events and some of its marked characteristics.  
 
Rev. President William Augustus Stearns, the representative  
of this period, was born in Bedford, Mass., March 17, 1805. His  
father, (Rev. Samuel Stearns of Bedford,) and both his grand-  
fathers were ministers of the gospel. His brothers are well  
known as distinguished teachers and preachers. He was pre-  
pared for College at Phillips Academy, Andover, and graduated  
with honor at Cambridge, in 1827, with such classmates as  
Prof. Felton and Rev. Dr. Sweetser. He went through the  
full course of theological study at Andover, in the same class  
with Dr. Brainerd of Philadelphia, Dr. Joseph S. Clark, Presi-  
dent Labaree, Prof. Owen, and Prof. Park the Class of '31.  
After teaching a short time at Duxbury, he was ordained Decem-  
ber 14, 1831, pastor of the Church at Cambridgeport, where he  
remained almost twenty-three years, honored and beloved by all  
his people as an able preacher and wise pastor, identified with  
the public schools of Cambridge, and greatly interested in the  
University, and sustaining influential relations to the cause  
of education and religion in Boston and vicinity. This brief  
general statement will suffice to show how different President  
Stearns' antecedents were from those of either of his predeces-  
sors, and how these, together with the breadth and balance of  
his character and his culture, qualified him to supplement and  
complete their work.  
 
The reluctance with which he tore himself away from his peo-  
ple and the hesitation and anxiety with which he undertook the  
presidency of Amherst College, will be seen in the following  
extracts from his letter to the committee of the corporation : l  
" No prudent man could think of entering upon an office of so  
much importance especially in recollection of the honored men,  
who have heretofore so nobly filled it, and the expectations of  
the community in reference to its incumbents, in connection  
with the labor and responsibility it involves without hesitation  
and distrust. But in the present case, other circumstances led  
me to question long and seriously the expediency of my accept-  
ing a position which, though highly honorable, and in many re-  
spects inviting, must always be one of anxiety and toil. I knew  
that, in complying with the wishes of the corporation, I must  
submit to a great sacrifice of personal feeling, to say nothing of  
worldly advantage, both present and in reference to future years.  
I must leave a people among whom I have labored in the gospel  
nearly three-and twenty years, and who, so far as I have any  
knowledge, are, without a dissentient voice, well satisfied with  
my ministrations. I must leave a Society now highly prosper-  
ous, and as a situation for any pastor who understands it, hardly  
second to any other in the country. I must leave a delightful  
home, built under my own directions, and whose ample shade  
and fruit-trees and shrubbery were set out, and have been cher-  
ished by my own hand. I must tear away my family from their  
most cherished friendships, and my children from the schools  
which I really think are the best in the world. But I will not  
trouble you with the trial of feeling which I have passed through.  
Other, and I think, higher considerations have gained the ascend-  
ency. Divine direction has been earnestly sought, and I have  
a pleasing consciousness of acting in the case, under the direct-  
ing influence of an overruling Power. I have accordingly come  
to a result which, a few weeks ago, I could hardly have consid-  
ered among the possibilities, viz : to accept the office you have  
conferred upon me, and to attempt the high duties it involves.  
 
1 This letter is copied in the Records. The Committee were Rev. Joseph S.  
Clarke, D. D., (Dr. Stearns' classmate,) Hon. Linus Child, and Henry Edwards,  
 
I do this relying on that cordial sympathy and co-operation on  
the part of the Trustees and honored Professors of the College  
which, I have been assured, will be truly accorded to me, and  
without which I could indulge no hope of success. It gives me  
pleasure, in this connection, to believe that I shall be assisted  
in my untried labor by the experience of the amiable and dis-  
tinguished gentleman, who has so long and acceptably presided  
over the College, and whom I shall never cease to respect and  
love."  
 
The Inauguration, of which we have already given an account,  
took place on Wednesday, the 22d of November, 1854. After  
some graceful allusions to the origin and early history, the found-  
ers and former Presidents of Amherst College, of which, though  
not an alumnus, he expresses the highest appreciation, and asks  
to be accepted as a true son though by adoption, the Inaugural  
Address proceeds to define the end or aim of education, which is  
to produce in the person educated the highest style of man, and  
then to discuss the most essential ways and means, physical, in-  
tellectual, moral and religious, by which that end or aim is to be  
accomplished. We shall see further on, how not a few of the  
ideas which the President thus developed in his Inaugural, have  
been realized under his administration. The key-note of the  
address is contained in the concluding sentences : " Young gen-  
tlemen, your highest attainment is the attainment of right rela-  
tions towards God, and a concordance with the other harmonies  
of the universe. There is one great CENTRAL LIFE whose pul-  
sations are beating through all created worlds. When in addi-  
tion to a profound and brilliant scholarship, attended with high  
moral and social excellence, and wise physical self-control, you  
come into sympathy with this great LIFE, so that your spirit  
answers to that Spirit, as the pulsations of the wrist keep time  
with those that are throbbing in your heart, then will you be  
truly educated, then will you have reached the highest order of  
man."  
 
In the evening after the inauguration the students expressed  
their good will to the new President and their expectation of a  
 
letters of brilliant light across the entire front of Middle (now  
North) and South Colleges, and as he stood in front of the  
Octagonal Cabinet, admiring the brilliant spectacle, they gath-  
ered spontaneously around him, extemporized an address of wel-  
come through a member of the Senior class, and drew from him  
a ready and hearty response.  
 
The following extract from a letter written by an alumnus of  
the Class of '61, ] reflects the buoyant, hopeful and kindly feel-  
ing of the students in the opening years of the new adminis-  
tration and exhibits some of the characteristic features of the  
period: "The Class of '61 entered at a time when the whole  
College was alive with the energy of a new start and growth.  
North College had just been burned down, find the lost building  
was to be replaced by a beautiful edifice to be erected by the  
munificence of the Hon. Samuel Williston. The Literary So-  
cieties were elated with the thought of having new and spa-  
cious rooms for their meetings and their libraries. The lovers of  
Chemistr}' were to have every needed facility for practice, which  
were to be so improved that more than half the students of sev-  
eral classes of their own free choice took Practical Chemistry.  
East College was to be erected to meet the growing wants of  
the Institution, and better still, one of the finest gymnasiums of  
the country and a new system of gymnastic exercises adopted  
that would save the health of numbers who would not exercise  
unless required by the authority of the Faculty. The whole  
atmosphere of the College indicated unusual executive ability in  
all concerned in its management. There was redoubled effort  
on the part of the Professors to raise the standard of schol-  
arship. The examinations were conducted by a new method  
more searching than ever before. Every precaution was used to  
ascertain the exact merits of every scholar. The most impartial  
methods and means were resorted to in order to determine the  
improvement made in each study. It was during our course  
that written examinations were instituted with most marked and  
beneficial results. And prizes were offered in almost all the de-  
partments. Instead of a few competing for the prizes in decla-  
mation, nearly every member of the class stood his trial 2 for the  
 
privilege of competing. I doubt if there was ever before, in the  
history of the College, a time when such untiring efforts were  
made in every respect for the good of the students."  
 
It will be remembered that one pleasant incident of the exer-  
cises of inauguration day was the announcement of a liberal  
donation from the estate of Mr. Appleton, for the erection of a  
Zoological and Ichnological Museum. Dr. Hitchcock had made  
the request a year previous, and had given up all expectation  
that it would be granted. There is reason to believe that con-  
fidence in the wisdom of the new President conspired with  
admiration for the genius and science of his predecessor in se-  
curing the donation. However that may be, the time of the an-  
nouncement was not accidental, and the donation, while it formed  
a brilliant and appropriate finale to the retiring administration,  
furnished also an auspicious omen for the incoming presidency.  
Nor did the omen prove fallacious. The Appleton gift was only  
the beginning of a succession of donations and bequests, which  
amount in the aggregate to nearly eight hundred thousand dol-  
lars, and which mark the presidency of Dr. Stearns beyond even  
that of Dr. Hitchcock, as the period of large and liberal founda-  
tions. The following is a list of the principal donations of this  
period, arranged as nearly as possible in chronological order. It  
is given, not only in justice to the donors, but also as showing  
the purpose of the donations and thus illustrating this portion  
of our history :  
 
1 Building and contents cost $1,167, of which only $200 was paid out of the  
College Treasury.  
 
The larger part of these donations it will be seen, were made  
during and after the war, and thus they illustrate a general char-  
acteristic of this period in the history of our country. No other  
period can compare with it in the munificence of its public char-  
ities ; and there is no other form of public charity, for which  
 
* Estimated at $12 : 000 by the curator (Prof. E. Hitchcock,) but about $4,000 was  
paid out of State grants already mentioned out of the College treasury. Among  
these contributions are the megatherium, by Joshua Bates, Esq., of London, ($500;)  
the skeleton and skin of the gorilla, by Rev. William Walker of the Gaboon mission,  
(then worth in the market $2,000;) and some $600 to Dr. E. Hitchcock, Jr., for  
 
They have given spontaneously hundreds of thousands and mil-  
lions where in earlier periods they could scarcely have been per-  
suaded to give hundreds and thousands. The comparative ease  
with which this large amount was obtained, illustrates that great  
doctrine of Scripture and fact of universal observation, that to  
him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly.  
Only a small fraction of this amount was raised by subscription.  
The larger part of it came unsolicited. Much of it came from  
old friends and former benefactors of the College The bequest  
of President Moore was made in the years of its infancy and  
poverty, and came in at this time because Mrs. Moore so long  
outlived her husband came in with increase, because she nursed  
it so assiduously by economy and good management. Jonathan  
Phillips, Esq., had been a subscriber to the Library fund, and  
had contributed to the expenses of President Hitchcock when  
traveling in Europe. Moses H. Baldwin, Esq., one of the con-  
tributors to the Walker Building Fund, had before been a sub-  
scriber for the Library, and was a personal friend of the Professor  
who began the raising of that subscription. Mr. Sears and Mr.  
Gilbert had both given before to the treasury of the College.  
Mr. Tappan and Mr. Williston began to give before the close of  
Dr. Humphrey's presidency, and from that time were always  
giving and always ready to give in every emergency.  
 
Even the Legislature turned a comparatively willing ear to  
our petition, and twice more opened (though not very wide and  
that apparently for the last time), the treasury of the Common-  
wealth to supply the wants of Amherst College. The aid from  
the State in 1859 was granted the more readily doubtless because  
other Institutions shared in it, and some of them more largely  
than Amherst College. The bill became a law April 2, 1859.  
It provided, that after a certain sum had been received into the  
State treasury from the sale of the Back Bay lands, one-half of  
the proceeds of subsequent sales should be added to the Massa-  
chusetts School Fund, and the other half appropriated in cer-  
tain proportions, as it accrued, to five Institutions of learning in  
the Commonwealth, until the Museum of Comparative Zoology  
should have received an amount not exceeding one hundred  
 
Williams College, Amherst College and the Wesleyan Academy  
at Wilbraham, twenty-five thousand dollars each. No part of  
these appropriations was to be paid, however, until satisfactory  
evidence had been furnished by each Institution, that it had  
raised an equal sum by subscription, or otherwise, from some  
other source. It was further provided in the bill, that each of the  
three Colleges should establish three free Scholarships. These  
conditions were promptly complied with on the part of Amherst  
College, and the first installment of six thousand dollars and a  
little more was paid over in September, 1861, and the remainder  
of the twenty-five thousand dollars in September, 1863. On  
the 27th of April, 1863, after repeated solicitations by Dr.  
Hitchcock in person, the Legislature made another special grant  
of two thousand five hundred dollars to the Department of Nat-  
uraHHistory. Here endeth the history of grants from the State  
in aid of Amherst College. Two appropriations of twenty -five  
thousand dollars each and one of two thousand five hundred  
Amherst College those of Dr. Walker were the most surprising,  
because they came from so unforeseen and unexpected a source.  
A graduate of Harvard, and a resident of one of those cities in  
the vicinity of Cambridge whose property seems to be almost the  
birthright and inheritance of that University, Dr. Walker wished  
and intended to endow the medical department of his Alma Ma-  
ter. Not finding her sufficiently facile and pliant to his wishes,  
he turned his attention to the other Colleges, and began to give  
to them with a liberality which was fitted and doubtless intended  
to show the authorities at Cambridge how much they had lost.  
One of these Colleges was soon dropped from the list of his bene-  
ficiaries for a similar reason. President Stearns had the discern-  
ment to see the substantial excellence of Dr. Walker's ideas, and  
the wisdom, instead of opposing or questioning, to humor and  
guide his plans, and thus to enlist him more and more zealously  
in the service of the College. The result was that the Doctor  
gave Amherst at different times and for different purposes one  
hundred thousand dollars in his life-time, drew in forty thousand  
 
dollars from other sources by making that the condition of his  
own donations, and left ii^ his will a legacy which, with the in-  
come accruing, has already realized nearly one hundred and fifty  
thousand dollars. The condition just alluded to seemed at the  
time not only unfortunate, but impracticable and appalling. But  
thanks to the wisdom of President Stearns and the benevolence  
of the friends chiefly old and tried friends of the College, the  
forty thousand dollars was raised. Mr. Williston, Mr. Hitchcock  
and James Smith, Esq., of Philadelphia, gave ten thousand dollars  
apiece, and Messrs. Hardy, Edwards, Alden, Baldwin and others  
made up the remaining ten thousand dollars, thus exhibiting  
a generosity the more praiseworthy and thankworthy because  
their charities were to be merged in a " Walker Building Fund,"  
and their own preferences were sacrificed for so great an interest  
of the Institution.  
 
The presidency of Dr. Stearns is emphatically the period of  
scholarships and prizes. Aside from the distribution of the in-  
come of the Charity Fund, which really constituted so many  
Ministerial Scholarships (and they are now actually called by  
that name), there was not a single Scholarship in existence at  
the commencement of his administration. Eleazar Porter, Esq.,  
of Hadley, has the honor of establishing the first Scholarship in  
Amherst College. This was in 1857. The last catalogue shows  
more than fifty Scholarships 1 in the gift of the College varying  
in annual income from forty to three hundred dollars each, and  
distributing each year over four thousand dollars among the stu-  
dents ; several others (Class Scholarships) are announced as  
partly established by the Alumni, and the income of the last mu-  
tion were those for elocution, and these had usually been merely  
nominal, and were paid out of the College treasury. The first  
regular prizes given by an individual for successive years were  
 
the presidency of Dr. Hitchcock. In 1857, Hon. Alpheus Hardy  
of Boston established the Hardy Prizes for improvement in Ex-  
temporaneous Speaking ; and now we have a thousand dollars  
distributed every year as prizes for excellence in nearly all of  
the several departments.  
 
Of the twelve College edifices that now stand on the College  
hill, six have been added during the presidency of Dr. Stearns.  
And the style and character of these, as compared with the ear-  
lier buildings, is more remarkable than their number. There  
has been a constant progress in costliness and elegance. The  
last three have been built of stone, the Pelham or Monson gran-  
ite, and the last two, at least, in a plan and style of architecture  
worthy of a material that is at once so rich and so enduring.  
Th^ new College Church alone, when it is finished, will have  
cost as much as the whole five edifices that have come down  
from previous administrations ; and Walker Hall cost as much  
as all the other buildings on College hill together, exclusive of  
the College Church. It is scarcely exaggeration to say, that  
President Stearns found the College brick, and will leave it  
granite.  
 
The first building erected after the accession of President  
Stearns, was the Appleton Cabinet. This was built in 1855.  
The Building Committee consisted of Prof. Hitchcock, Mr. Wil-  
liston and Prof. Clark, and Mr. Sykes was the architect the  
same under whose direction the Woods Cabinet and the Library  
had been built. It was the preference of Dr. Hitchcock that  
this edifice should be placed on the west side of the Woods  
Cabinet, where the danger from fire would have been less, and  
where it would have been in convenient contiguity with the  
geological specimens. The Building Committee acceded to the  
views and wishes of Dr. Hitchcock, and at first located it there.  
But their opinion was overruled by that of the Prudential Com-  
mittee, on the ground that the appearance would be unsightly.  
Mr. Luke Sweetser, who, for thirty-one years has been a resi-  
dent member of the Prudential Committee, remonstrated with  
special earnestness against that location, and in order to remove  
 
for a thousand dollars. This view prevailed ; the Appleton  
Cabinet was placed on the south wing of the dormitories, thus  
taking the place of a new South College, which had long been  
contemplated to balance the old North College, and to complete  
the row ; and the geological lecture-room was at the same time  
the Nineveh Gallery, which was erected by Enos Dickinson,  
Esq., of South Amherst, on " the site of the old church, where  
for thirty years he had attended meeting, where he was baptised  
and made a profession of religion," and of which he remarked  
to Dr. Hitchcock, " that if he should desire to leave his name  
anywhere on earth that would be the spot." * " The building  
cost five hundred and sixty-seven dollars. It is a small room,  
but it is probably as large as that in the palace of Nimroud,  
from which the sculptured slabs were taken." The contents  
cost some six hundred dollars, 2 their money value is at least as  
many thousands their value to the College as educators and  
as memorials, is beyond calculation. The sculptured slabs, six in  
number, from the palace of Sardanapalus, the seals, cylinders  
and bricks from Nineveh and Babylon, the coins of gold, silver  
and copper, a thousand in number, mostly ancient, and com-  
mencing with those of Alexander the Great, were all procured  
and sent at great labor and expense by Dr. Henry Lobdell, mis-  
sionary to Assyria, of the Class of '49, who, in December, 1854,  
made his sixth visit to Nimroud, in order to dispatch the sculp-  
tures, and who died at Mosul, the site of ancient Nineveh, on  
the 25th day of March, 1855. For the gallery and its contents  
the College is indebted ultimately and entirely to the agency of  
Dr. Hitchcock, who encouraged Dr. Lobdell to send the speci-  
mens, raised the money to pay all the expenses, superintended  
the whole business, and in short manifested scarcely less interest  
in these foot-prints of former generations of men, than in the  
ichnolites of the pre-Adamic earth in his own cabinet.  
 
The next public buildings were the result of a calamity which,  
as not unfrequently happens, proved a blessing in disguise. One  
cold and stormy night in the winter of 1857, when the north-  
west wind blew almost a hurricane and the thermometer was  
many degrees below zero, the old North College caught fire in a  
student's room. The occupants of the room and nearly all the  
occupants of the building were in attendance on the meetings  
of the Literary Societies in the Middle and South Colleges.  
Before they could give or get the alarm, the fire had progressed  
so far as to forbid even the attempt to extinguish it. All efforts  
were directed towards saving the other buildings. Had the  
wind been in the north or north-east, this would have been im-  
possible. Being in the north-west the flames and burning frag-  
ments were for the most part driven to the eastward ; otherwise  
in spite of all exertions, Middle College must have taken fire,  
and to all human appearance, the Chapel, the South College and  
the newly erected Appleton Cabinet would all have been swept  
away by the conflagration. By midnight or a little later, North  
College with no small portion of its contents the furniture and  
books of students had gone up in a whirlwind of flame or had  
been reduced to ashes. Such was the uproar of the elements  
that night, that the writer in his own house in the edge of the  
village, not half a mile away, heard no alarm and knew nothing  
of the calamity till, early the next morning, he was summoned  
to a Faculty meeting called for consultation in the emergency.  
When he arrived on the ground, nothing remained but the black-  
ened brick walls enclosing a heap of smoking ruins. " A pho-  
tograph of the broken, blackened walls, taken some days after,  
now hangs in the lower west room of the Library, and is the  
only memorial of one of the greatest catastrophes and one of  
the greatest blessings the College ever experienced." 1 No in-  
considerable part of this blessing, in the estimation of our good  
President, seems to be the getting rid of old North College  
" the most unsightly and most uncomfortable structure in the  
range." I can not quite sympathize with him in that feeling.  
 
lege edifice in which I ever occupied a room as a student ; and  
to me as to many of the earliest occupants, its rooms and halls  
and walls were all sacred and beautiful. But the fire was an  
undoubted blessing in that it enlisted the sympathy of friends,  
and ere long gave us two better buildings in its stead. The ap-  
peal of the Faculty in behalf of the students, some of whom  
had lost everything but what they had on their persons, met  
with so prompt and hearty a response that ere long we issued a  
card saying that no more was needed. And scarcely had the  
ruins ceased to smoke, when with characteristic promptness as  
well as generosity Mr. Williston, that unfailing friend of the  
College, volunteered to erect on the site a new edifice containing  
a Chemical Laboratory, rooms for the Libraries and the meetings  
of the two Literary Societies, and an Alumni Hall, if the Trus-  
tees would engage, with the insurance and additional subscrip-  
tions to replace the lost dormitory. This condition which, like  
Dr. Walker's in regard to Walker Hall, was, of course, intended  
only to double the benefaction, was accepted by the Trustees,  
and the new buildings were both erected in 1857, the same year  
in which the old dormitory was burnt. Both edifices were built  
under the general direction of Mr. Williston, Mr. Charles E.  
Parkes of Boston being the architect, and Prof. Clark and Mr.  
Luke Sweetser being associated with the former as building com-  
mittee in the erection of East College. Thus, to express in  
Dr. Stearns' own language the " great blessing " which resulted  
from the " great catastrophe," " two new buildings sprang up  
from the ashes of the old, one of them Williston Hall, so comely  
in appearance, so convenient in arrangement, so generously be-  
stowed and so full of invitation to the returning graduate as  
he comes up from the village to the College grounds ; the other,  
East College, which the prophets represent as destined to be  
taken down and rebuilt, or moved bodily to another spot." l  
 
The dedication of the two buildings, delayed for several  
reasons, took place on the 19th of May, 1858. The Trustees  
held a special meeting on the occasion. Mr. Williston and  
Mr. Sweetser reported the results of their labors, and formally  
delivered the buildings into the hands of the Trustees. Presi-  
 
dent Stearns, on the part of the Trustees, made a suitable re-  
sponse. Prayer was offered by Rev. Dr. Vaill ; and Rev. Henry  
Ward Beecher delivered an address, in which, as fitly as elo-  
quently, he discoursed on Institutions as a means of perpetuat-  
ing influence.  
 
The next building was the Gymnasium. This was commenced  
in the autumn of 1859, and completed in the summer of 1860.  
Hon. J. B. Woods, Prof. W. S. Clark, Hon. S. Williston and the  
President, were appointed a committee, with full powers to col-  
lect funds, procure plans, select a site, and erect the building.  
"Subscriptions were obtained by Prof. W. S.Clark, Prof. W.  
S. Tyler, and some others, to the amount of about five thousand  
dollars. For the other five thousand dollars the College resorted  
again to borrowing." l The building was planned by the same  
architect as Williston Hall and East College Mr. Charles E.  
Parkes of Boston. President Hitchcock says : " It is massive  
in appearance, without much architectural beauty, though in  
conformity with architectural rules." To the eye of the writer,  
it is one of the most beautiful buildings on the College campus.  
It has the beauty of fitness and the beauty, rare in our day, of  
a severe simplicity. The builders had the good sense and good  
taste to return to the use of stone, * instead of brick, in which their  
example has been followed in all subsequent buildings, and will  
be followed, we trust, in all coming time. Upon the completion  
of the building, the name of " Barrett Gymnasium " was given  
to it, from Dr. Benjamin Barrett of Northampton, who had con-  
tributed liberally towards its erection. Dr. Barrett afterwards  
put in at his own expense a gallery at the west end, for the con-  
venience of spectators, and contributed more or less each year  
while he lived, for repairing the building, improving the appara-  
tus and ornamenting the grounds. And at his death, in 1869,  
 
1 Dr. Hitchcock's " Reminiscences." The Trustees had already borrowed five  
thousand dollars to supplement the subscriptions for East College.  
 
2 The same that was used in the Library building, viz., the Pelham gneiss or  
granite.  
 
thousand dollars) was filled up in 1864. At a special meeting  
of the Trustees in November, 1866, they appointed a Building  
Committee of their own number. This committee consisted of  
President Stearns, Hon. Samuel Williston, Hon. Alpheus Hardy,  
Hon. Edward B. Gillett, and Samuel Bowles, Esq. 1 The corner-  
stone of the building was laid on the 10th of June, 1868 ; and  
it was not till the 20th of October, 1870, that Walker Hall was  
opened with appropriate ceremonies. Thus, more than six years  
had elapsed since the money was raised, and more than seven,  
almost eight years since Dr. Walker made his first offering of  
twenty thousand dollars, (in January, 1863,) before the edifice  
was completed and set apart for its scientific uses ; tarn diu Roma  
condebatur. But it was right and wise to take a long time in  
building a structure that was expected to endure a long while.  
There was an intrinsic difficulty in uniting and harmonizing so  
many diverse interests. The whole department of Mathematics  
and Astronomy, the recitations, lectures and apparatus of the  
Professor of Natural Philosophy, the Shepard Cabinet of Min-  
eralogy, and rooms for the Trustees, the President and the  
Treasurer, were all to be brought beneath one roof, and what  
seemed for a time quite impracticable, nearly all these rooms  
must needs be, where all the living rooms of a house in this cli-  
mate ought to be, on the south side. When these conflicting  
interests were all reconciled, there still remained the scarcely  
less difficult question of a convenient and beautiful location.  
For the College campus, though sightly, is far from being site-ful;  
and a site satisfactory to all concerned, and suitable for such a  
building, was found at length, only by the purchase and annex-  
ation of three or four additional acres on the north side.  
 
Several architects and landscape-gardeners were consulted in  
the settlement of these vexed questions. More than one archi-  
Williston and Hon. A. Hardy, was appointed at a special meeting of the Board in  
Boston, in January, 1863, to procure plans and estimates. But a building that  
should cost only forty thousand dollars was then contemplated. The plan was  
 
which solved the almost insoluble difficulties of the problem and  
united beauty with convenience, was that of George Hathorne,  
of New York. This plan was adopted, and he became the archi-  
tect of the building. The contract for the masonry was given  
to Richard H. Ponsonby, and that for the carpenter work to  
C. W. Lessey. The immediate oversight was entrusted to Wil-  
liam A. Dickinson, Esq., of Amherst. The laying of the corner-  
stone with due form and ceremony was on the forenoon of Class  
Day, June 10, 1868. Hon. Edward Dickinson presided and in-  
troduced the services. Prayer was offered by Rev. Dr. Vaill.  
The stone was placed with appropriate ceremonies by the Senior  
class who had desired to honor their Class Day by this act and  
had selected a committee of their number for the purpose. A  
hymn was sung by the College Choir. A paper was read by  
President Stearns, making some statements respecting the char-  
acter and design of the building, together with notices of Dr.  
Walker and the principal donors. After a few extemporaneous  
remarks by Hon. Alpheus Hardy and Prof. Snell, the exercises  
were concluded by singing the doxology and the pronouncing  
of the benediction.  
 
After an interval of two years and four months, on the  
20th of October, 1870, the formal opening of Walker Hall took  
place. The order of exercises was as follows : In College Hall,  
1, Music by the Orchestra ; 2, Introductory Prayer by Rev. Mr.  
Dwight of Hadley ; 3, Address by President Stearns ; 4, Com-  
mencement Hymn, " Let children hear the mighty deeds," etc.  
In Walker Hall, 1, Music by the Band ; 2, Statement by W. A.  
Dickinson, Esq. ; 3, Prayer of the Opening by Rev. Dr. Paine  
of Holden ; 4, Statement by Prof. Snell ; 5, Speeches by mem-  
bers of the Board of Trustees and by gentlemen from abroad ;  
6, " Old Hundred," by the audience.  
 
The address of President Stearns, although written under the  
pressure of an emergency created by the failure of others on  
whom he relied to perform this service, was an able and eloquent  
presentation of his well-considered views on the education de-  
manded by the times, which, notwithstanding the floods of rain  
 
endorsement of the Trustees as " sound and able," has been given  
to the public. The programme of exercises in Walker Hall was  
cut short by " darkening clouds and premature evening." But  
the interesting statements chiefly historical, by Mr. Dickinson  
and Prof. Snell, and the appropriate and felicitous remarks of  
Prof. Roswell D. Hitchcock of the Union Theological Seminary,  
were sufficient ; and further speech-making by " members of the  
Board of Trustees and gentlemen from abroad " was unnecessar} r .  
 
Walker Hall is a happy conception happily executed. It em-  
bodies an idea and gives a local habitation to a department. It  
is a fit temple of science. With an exterior worthy of a palace,  
it installs, not to say enthrones, mathematics and physics in  
rooms and halls " fit for the crowned truth to dwell in ; " and the  
bringing beneath the same roof of rooms also for the President,  
the Trustees and the archives of the College, suggests the idea  
which Dr. Walker doubtless cherished, that these sciences are  
entitled to a leading place and a controlling influence in a system  
of public education. The opening of Walker Hall removed the  
last vestige of scientific instruction from the old chapel building  
where all the departments dwelt together for so many years, and  
left literature and philosophy the sole occupants. Two things  
are illustrated by this part of our history, first the progress of  
lege Church was made in 1864. Seven or eight years have  
elapsed, and the edifice is still unfinished. The delay has been  
partly to give time for the increase of the building fund, and  
partly owing to the difficulty of fixing the location, but chiefly,  
as in the case of Walker Hall, with the intention of building  
well rather than building quickly.  
 
The question of location long occasioned much perplexity.  
Opinions differed widely on the subject. The lot west of the  
street, and south of the President's house, had many and warm  
advocates. Others recommended a site on the north line of the  
College grounds, and fronting northwards, about half way be-  
 
ward, in the rear of the Appleton Cabinet. Others still con-  
tended strenuously for some central situation near the College  
grove as fitly symbolizing the central relation of Christianity and  
the Church to literature and the sciences. Perhaps all regretted  
that East College had preoccupied the very best site in the  
whole campus, and not a few advised its immediate removal,  
and the erection of the College Church on the same spot. Thus  
like a wavering needle drawn in opposite directions by various  
magnets, the church seemed to change front and position at dif-  
ferent times towards all points of the compass. But it settled  
at length towards the rising sun. The unanimous verdict of  
the most distinguished architects decided the question in favor  
of the present site, just in the rear of East College but necessi-  
tating^ at some time the removal of that building. " It might  
seem," says President Stearns in his address at the laying of the  
corner-stone " it might seem to our old graduates and to others  
who have not studied the case, an unexpected and singular move-  
ment, to pass over, as we have done, into what was regarded here-  
tofore as the back-yard of our College grounds, and crowd the  
new edifice into the very mouth of the dormitory which has for  
some years crowned the knoll. But looking from East College,  
destined some time or other to be removed, let me say to each  
one who doubts the propriety of the location, circumspice. Think  
of a pleasant Sabbath morning, as our young men and families  
of many generations of the future, throng to the house of prayer  
and see the beauty of the Lord spread over the mountains and  
the intervale before us and the quiet homes nestling within it,  
and tell me, will not nature furnish inspirations to praise. If we  
need further reason, it may be expressed in the brief words of  
Mr. Williston, who has often surprised me with the breadth and  
wisdom of his views on such subjects. When the advice of the  
best architectural and gardening skill in the country had been ob-  
tained, and reasons set forth, and the final question was put to  
that gentleman, shall we plan the building for present conven-  
ience or for a hundred years to come, his immediate response  
was 'five hundred years to come.'" The committee to whom  
by vote of the Trustees in 1869 the whole subject was referred,  
consisted of the President, William F. Stearns, Esq., Messrs.  
 
Williston, Hardy and Gillett, and Mr. W. A. Dickinson. Wil-  
liam Appleton Potter, Esq., of New York, was the architect.  
The- Church was erected under the personal oversight and direct  
superintendence of President Stearns, to whose watchful eye  
and excellent taste, scarcely less than to the art and science of  
the architect, the building owes its perfection.  
 
' The corner-stone was laid on the 22d of September, 1870,  
with the following order of exercises: Preliminary Statement  
by the President; Introductory Prayer by Prof. Tyler; Address  
by Rev. Christopher Gushing of Boston ; placing of the Stone by  
the Senior class (Class of '71) ; Hymn, " Christ is our Corner-  
stone ;" Prayer by Rev. Mr. Jenkins of Ainherst ; Doxology ;  
Benediction.  
 
The following passages from the President's Preliminary State-  
ment should be put on record as showing his views and those of  
the donor, William F. Stearns, Esq., in regard to this edifice :  
" We have assembled to place the corner-stone of an edifice,  
which, in accordance with the great idea of the College, ' the  
highest education and all for Christ,' is to be, when completed  
and dedicated, the College Church. In pursuing this principle  
which has always actuated some of us, a desire has long existed,  
since we have public worship together, to hold the religious ser-  
vices of the Sabbath, as other churches do, in a retired, consecra-  
ted Sabbath home, from which all the studies and distractions of  
the week should be excluded, and where the suggestions of the  
place should assist us to gather in our thoughts and, in the enjoy-  
ment of sacred silence, to confer with God.  
 
" Some of the views of the donor in furnishing the means for  
the College Church were thus expressed to the Trustees at the  
time they were given, and in the same spirit they were grate-  
fully accepted by them. 1, The Church is to be used by the  
College for strictly religious observances, especially for Chris-  
tian worship and preaching, and for no other purpose. 2, The  
preacher shall always profess his full and earnest belief in the  
religion of the Old and New Testaments as a supernatural revela-  
tion from God, and in Jesus Christ as the Divine and only Savior,  
' who was crucified for our sins and raised again for our justifi-  
cation,' and generally for substance of doctrine in the evangeli-  
 
cal system or gospel of Christ as understood by the projectors  
and founders of the College. 3, The preacher in the pulpit, and  
in all the exercises of this Church, shall exhibit that sobriety,  
dignity, and reverence of manner and expression which becomes  
the sacredness of the place, and is in keeping with those solemn  
emotions which true Christians are supposed to experience.  
 
" We have spoken of this new edifice as the College Church.  
We call it Church instead of Chapel, because we would distin-  
guish it from the old Chapel opposite to us, and are not willing  
to do this by the use of any mere human name, and because,  
while the word chapel, from the Latin capella, has no Christian  
significance in its etymology but means only a short cloak, hood  
or cowl and was first used, it is said, to designate the tent in  
which St. Martin's hat or cowl was preserved, the word church  
firicls its origin and its meaning in the Christian epithet KvQiaxoz,  
belonging to the Lord, and which, while it is a proper designa-  
tion alike for an assembly of believers and for the consecrated  
place in which they worship, is just as appropriate for a small  
building as for a large one."  
 
Rev. Mr. Gushing in his appropriate and instructive address,  
spoke of the American College, as not merely an educational  
institution, but having a distinctively religious character, founded  
originally for Christ and the Church and intended primarily to  
educate me'n for the gospel ministry. But this primary idea  
and intention of the College, he insisted, was endangered by the  
secularizing and materialistic spirit of the age which would pa-  
ganize the public schools, and make the College a University  
from which that element only should be excluded, viz. religion,  
which was originally its very life and breath. The statistics of  
the New England Colleges during the last half century show a  
great relative decline in the number of graduates who enter the  
ministry. Indeed while the number of graduates of the last  
decade (1855-65) is nearly double that of the first (1815-25,)  
the number of ministers in the last is but a slight absolute in-  
crease over that of the first, although the demand for ministers  
is greatly augmented. " These facts," he concludes, " demand  
 
importance of the College Church as a means of grace to the stu-  
dents and as the means of furnishing ministers of the gospel."  
 
The College Church, not less than Walker Hall, embodies an  
idea and a department. A new department, as we shall see fur-  
ther on, was founded the same year in which funds were set  
apart for building the church. The College Church represents  
this department, gives it as it were a body and a form, and ex-  
presses the idea, not only of a place set apart expressly for the  
Sabbath worship and service, but also of a professorship whose  
undivided energies should be sacredly devoted to the religious  
welfare of the College. Combining in its architectural plan and  
style the beautiful and the useful of successive ages, it represents  
the religion of the College as uniting all that is true and good  
in the past history of the Church with whatsoever things are  
pure and lovely in our own age ; and being unquestionably the  
brightest architectural jewel on the brow of College hill, it fitly  
made to secure a suitable memorial for those students who had  
sacrificed their lives for their country. A public hall adorned  
with relics and trophies of the war, a lecture room and Profess-  
orship of History, a monument on the grounds, a monumental  
group of statues and tablets within doors all these were con-  
templated, some of them voted by the alumni and attempted,  
but all, for different reasons, proved unsatisfactory, or at least  
unsuccessful. This difficult question found at length an un-  
expected and most satisfactory solution in connection with the  
College Church. A chime of bells of unsurpassed excellence,  
placed in the tower by George Howe, Esq., of Boston, whose  
own son, a graduate of Amherst, fell a sacrifice to the war, an-  
swers the double purpose, to use the language of President  
Stearns, of " throwing out upon the breezes the sweet invita-  
tions of Christian psalmody to worship on the Lord's day, and  
of commemorating in patriotic and soothing melodies on appro-  
priate occasions, the nobleness of our sons and brothers who  
honored the College, while they shed their blood for Christ and  
 
Before any provision was made or expected for a new church,  
the rooms in the old chapel building had become so deformed  
and dilapidated, that thorough repairs were absolutely neces-  
sary. These repairs were made gradually, under the superin-  
tendence of W. A. Dickinson, Esq. They cost nearly as much  
as the original building. But they gave us possession of rooms  
far surpassing the original ones in convenience and elegance.  
The form of the rooms underwent little or no change. But  
they were entirely refitted, frescoed and furnished, and the reci-  
tation rooms, beginning with the Greek room, No. 1, and extend-  
ing gradually to the others, being adorned with maps and charts,  
photographs and engravings, bronzes and marbles illustrative of  
Greek and Roman art and antiquities, became teachers, no long-  
er of rudeness and slovenliness, but of order, truth and beauty.  
churcli edifice in 1867, the Trustees purchased the old edifice  
in which they already owned a share, in consideration of its an-  
nual use for Commencements, thoroughly remodeled and repair-  
ed it externally, and internally thus divesting it in a great meas-  
ure of its " astonishing " ugliness, and so acquired one of the  
most convenient and useful buildings on the College grounds.  
It pays already one-half the annual interest of its cost in rents  
for foreign uses ; the other half the College can well afford, if  
necessary, for its own use in Commencements, exhibitions, public  
lectures, written examinations, and the annual meetings of the  
alumni. By superseding Alumni Hall for these last purposes,  
(for written examinations, as well as alumni reunions,) it sets  
that room free for the use to which it is admirably adapted, of a  
gallery of Art and Archaeology which we are now endeavoring  
to inaugurate.  
 
While the College has thus been erecting or acquiring these  
convenient and beautiful buildings, a corresponding improvement  
has been going on pari passu in the College grounds. Mr. Wil-  
liston, Dr. Barrett, Mr. Hayden and others made donations for  
this purpose. Appropriations were voted from time to time from  
 
the ground was located and carefully prepared for cricket and  
base ball. Soon after, the College garden was instituted, which,  
planted and nourished under the direction of the Professor of  
Botany, presided over by " Sabrina," and guarded and cherished  
by the good sense and good taste of the students, has become  
one of the civilizing and refining institutions of Amherst College.  
The annexation of a part of the Boltwood farm, and the grad-  
ing of the site of Walker Hall, involved great changes in the  
College grounds and became the occasion of the greatest im-  
provement that has been made in them, by providing new drives  
and walks, furnishing more convenient access and entrance, and  
with the farm of which it was a part, the grove formerly known  
as Baker's Grove, near which the students for a time had their  
ball ground, and having adorned it with drives and walks, gave  
it in trust to the College on the single condition that the Trustees  
should preserve, improve and keep it forever as a public park.  
The Trustees gratefully accepted the donation and gave it the  
name of Hallock Park. It contains some seven acres of ancient  
and venerable oaks and pines such as can scarcely be found any-  
where else in Western Massachusetts. A valuable property in  
itself, it is an invaluable acquisition to the town and the College,  
and reflects equal honor on the taste and the liberality of the  
donor.  
 
If now we turn our attention to the departments of instruc-  
tion, we shall find 'that they have kept even pace with these im-  
provements in the buildings and grounds. Since the accession  
of Dr. Stearns to the presidency, three new departments have  
been established, represented severally by the three most recent  
buildings, viz. : the department of Hygiene and Physical Educa-  
tion, by the Gymnasium ; that of Mathematics and Astronomy by  
Walker Hall ; and that of Biblical History and Interpretation  
and the Pastoral Care, by the College Church.  
 
Physical education was a prominent topic in the Inaugural  
 
intellectual inferiority as well as moral perversity on the other,  
and contrasting the perfection of physical form, health and  
strength developed by the palestra and the gymnasium in ancient  
systems of education with the partial deformity, the languid  
step, stooping shoulders, cadaverous countenances and physical  
degeneracy induced by neglect of bodily training in modern  
times he says : " Physical education is not the leading business  
of college life, though were I able, like Alfred or Charlemagne,  
to plan an educational system anew, I would seriously consider  
the expediency of introducing regular drills in gymnastic and  
calisthenic exercises." The idea, thus early conceived and ex-  
pressed, grew in the President's mind with every year's experi-  
ence, till it became a new department. In each successive an-  
nual report to the Trustees he called their attention with in-  
creasing earnestness to the failing health and waning strength  
and in some instances the premature death of students, espe-  
cially in the spring of the year, as in his opinion wholly unneces-  
sary. In his report for 1859, he says : " If a moderate amount  
of physical exercise could be secured as a general thing to every  
student daily, I have a deep conviction founded on close obser-  
vation and experience, that not only would lives and health be  
preserved, but animation and cheerfulness, and a higher order  
of efficient study and intellectual life would be secured. It will  
be for the consideration of this Board, whether, for the encour-  
agement of this sort of exercise, the time has not come when  
efficient measures should be taken for the erection of a gynma-  
Trustees accordingly chose a committee consisting of the Presi-  
dent, Dr. Nathan Allen, Henry Edwards, Esq., and Hon. Alexan-  
der H. Bullock, who reported at once in favor of an immediate  
effort for erecting a gymnasium. The building was completed,  
as we have seen, in 1860. At the same time, the Trustees, at  
their annual meeting, in August, 1 860, voted to establish a de-  
partment of Physical Culture in the College, and elected John  
W. Hooker, M. D., of New Haven, Conn., the first Professor in  
the department. Dr. Hooker was an excellent gymnast and did  
 
nection with the College ceased after a few months. During the  
interregnum in the spring of 1861, taking advantage of the ex-  
citement which preceded the war, Col. Luke Lyman of North-  
ampton was employed to give instruction and training to students  
in military tactics and exercises.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees, in August, 1861, Dr.  
Edward Hitchcock, Jr., a graduate of the College, and of the  
Medical School of Harvard University, was appointed Professor  
in this department. And to his science, skill, patience, and rare  
tact in managing students, under the wise and efficient direction  
and co-operation of President Stearns, we are indebted for the  
remarkable success in Amherst College of a department which,  
almost everywhere else has proved a failure. The characteris-  
tic and essential features to which it owes its success are two.  
In the first place, the gymnasium is only part and parcel, or  
if you please, the head and front, of a department of Anatomy,  
Physiology and Physical Culture, which is committed to an ed-  
ucated physician and man of science, who is specially charged  
with the health of the students, as other Professors are charged  
with the several branches of mental education. In the second  
place, unless excused by the Professor for special reasons, every  
student is required to exercise under the Professor in the gymna-  
sium half an hour daily for four days in the week, just as much as  
he is required to attend the recitations and lectures in any other  
department. One other characteristic has contributed largely  
to the popularity and success of Dr. Hitchcock's management  
of gymnastic exercises. He knows how to intermingle recrea-  
tion and amusement with the severer drill of the gymnasium,  
maintaining military order and discipline during a portion of  
each half hour, and then allowing them to break up into sections  
or squads and take such exercise and recreation as they choose,  
so that the classes come to the gymnasium with much of the  
same relish and zest with which they go to the ball ground, and  
go through a part of their exercises, as well as leave them, often  
with laughter and shouts.  
 
A Committee of the Class of '65, the first class that enjoyed  
 
at all objectionable, and what at first in the exercise was a little  
embarrassing or unpleasant, soon became a positive pleasure.  
The simultaneous participation of every person in the same exer-  
cises has contributed a lively zest to them, when otherwise they  
would have proved dull and uninteresting. These exercises have  
been so varied in character as to be adapted both to the strongest  
and the weakest student, conducing alike to health, strength and  
grace of action. The half hour required for exercise has proved  
the golden mean between length and brevity of time for this  
purpose, and has never been considered lost by us, as our health  
at the close of our College course testifies to the inestimable  
value of this training. We are confident if this matter of ex-  
ercise had been left a voluntary thing, many of our class who  
are npw strong and healthy, would have yielded to the dis-  
eases incident to student life, while others who were weak and  
slender boys on entering College, are now strong and vigorous  
men."  
 
Four years later, the Class of '69, on the eve of their grad-  
uation, adopted unanimously the following Resolutions :  
 
" Resolved, that the daily required exercise, as at present con-  
ducted by Prof. Edward Hitchcock, by the happy union of pleas-  
ure and exercise, is exactly suited to our needs, giving us strength  
and vigor for our other duties and developing a more manly  
physique.  
 
" Resolved, that we convey to the friends of the gymnasium  
our hearty thanks for its foundation and support."  
 
The attractiveness of the exercises in the gymnasium to the  
public is seen in the number of visitors. " From September,  
1866, to the close of the College year in July, 1867, there were  
present at these exercises five thousand nine hundred and fifty-  
eight persons as visitors, and from September, 1867, to July 10,  
1868, the number was four thousand seven hundred and ninety-  
eight, more than one-fourth of whom were ladies ; and the av-  
erage number of visitors present attach exercise was over ten  
 
and eighty-seven. The prize exhibitions which occur once or  
twice a year, always draw crowds of spectators.  
 
In summing up the results of the experiment in 1869, Dr.  
Allen, to whose professional knowledge and constant supervision  
as one of the Trustees, this department owes more than to any  
one else, except President Stearns and Prof. Hitchcock, tes-  
tifies to a decided improvement in the countenances and general  
physique of the students, in the use of their limbs and physical  
movements generally, in their cheerfulness and buoyancy of  
spirits, in their sanitary condition and in their vital statistics,  
besides many incidental advantages, such as elevating the stand-  
ard of scholarship, preventing vicious and irregular habits, and  
aiding the government and discipline of the Institution.  
 
The following just and noble sentiments of Prof. Owen of  
the British Museum, printed and hung upon the walls as the  
alone, are gifted ! I say gifted, for the surpassing organization  
was no work of ours. It is He that hath made us ; not we our-  
selves. This frame is a temporary trust, for the uses of which  
we are responsible to the Maker.  
 
" Oh ! you who possess it in the supple vigor of lusty youth,  
think well what it is that He has committed to your keeping.  
Waste not its energies ; dull them not by sloth ; spoil them not  
by pleasures! The supreme work of creation has been accom-  
plished that you might possess a body the soul erect of all  
animal bodies the most free, and for what ? for the service of  
the soul.  
 
" Strive to realize the conditions of the possession of this  
wondrous structure. Think what it may become, the Temple  
of the Holy Spirit ! Defile it not. Seek, rather, to adorn it  
with all meek and becoming gifts, with that fair furniture, moral  
and intellectual, which it is your inestimable privilege to acquire  
 
was not only founded by Dr. Walker, but shaped to meet his  
views, and carefully defined in the terms and conditions of the  
several endowments. The documents in which the founder de-  
fines his views and wishes, and which constitute the statutes of  
the foundation, are spread out at length on the records of the  
Trustees, where they fill twelve entire, closely written folio  
pages. The first document which accompanied the endowment  
of the Walker professorship of Mathematics and Astronomy in  
1861, contains a minute description of the ends for which and  
the ways in which, in the opinion of the founder, Mathematics  
should be taught, under the heads of Arithmetic, Geometry,  
Algebra and Trigonometry. It is an interesting and highly  
characteristic document, showing positive opinions, a clear head  
and jwst ideas of .Mathematical studies. With a good sense,  
however, which is as characteristic as his positive opinions, the  
Doctor provides for such modifications of his methods as future  
experience may prove to be desirable : " It is not desirable," he  
says, " to limit a plan of instruction to the results of present ex-  
perience. That all acknowledged improvements may be adopted,  
but at the same time, they may be well considered, the Faculty  
shall be at liberty to make such changes in the plan of instruction  
herein marked out, as shall meet the approval in writing of Rev.  
Thomas Hill, D. D., the Presidents and Professors of Mathematics  
of Amherst, Tufts, Williams 1 and Harvard Colleges, the Presi-  
dent of the Boston Society of Natural History, and the Professor  
of Engineering at the Lawrence Scientific School, or of a major-  
ity of them it being the wish of the donor, that accurate and  
thorough instruction and drilling in the elementary branches  
should be insisted upon, whatever changes may be made."  
 
The following paragraph is also characteristic : " In teaching,  
younger persons are to be preferred as teachers of younger  
classes, but no teacher or tutor is to be employed who is not  
chosen for his merits, and whose merits have not been proved  
by rigid examination 2 to consist in part of precise and accurate  
 
knowledge of the fundamental truths of Geometry, Arithme-  
tic, Algebra and Trigonometry, and in part of the ability to  
Class of '60, was chosen Instructor in 1862, and in 1863 Pro-  
fessor of Mathematics and Astronomy. His trial for the pro-  
fessorship, was the calculation of the orbits of the satellites of  
Jupiter a work which had never before been done, and which  
occupied him for two years. The examination was by Prof.  
Pierce of Harvard College, by whom also the subject had been  
assigned or rather suggested for the choice of Mr. Esty.  
 
The second Walker document accompanied the foundation of  
the Walker Instructorship in 1863. It provides for the appoint-  
ment by the Trustees of some recent graduate of superior schol-  
arship and promise, as a special Instructor or Tutor, to give in-  
struction to select divisions of the Sophomore and Freshman  
classes. The characteristic features of this foundation are : 1,  
Small divisions, each consisting of not more than ten or twelve  
students it being the desire of the founder " to confine the  
benefits of this donation to those only who contribute on their  
part diligence and natural talent for mathematical studies," and  
his object being not so much that the students in these divisions  
shall be pressed into new and extended courses of mathemat-  
ical study, as that by thorough instruction and explanation, and  
persistent drilling and training with frequent reviews, repeti-  
tions and recitations, they shall become perfect masters of the  
text-books and subjects which shall be studied by their class-  
mates not connected with these divisions. 2, " To these divis-  
ions may be admitted such University students as may satisfy  
the College Faculty of their eminent qualifications to benefit by  
such instruction, who submit to all the laws and regulations of  
the College for the time being, and pay such tuition fees as the  
College may think reasonable." 3, " As it is a part of my ob-  
ject to encourage meritorious effort and success among the stu-  
dents in this study, no Instructor shall be employed longer than  
three years, but another shall be chosen to take his place from  
 
this provision and are esteemed by the Trustees of the College  
as most deserving."  
 
In 1864 a third document was presented by the founder, enu-  
merating the several donations he had made, modifying the de-  
tails of the second document in some respects, to meet the views  
of the President and the Professor of Mathematics, without,  
however, altering the fundamental principles, and settling defin-  
itively the terms and conditions of the whole foundation.  
 
It will be seen that the plan of instruction in Mathematics,  
known among us as the Walker system, incidentally involves  
some peculiar features which are a departure from the old and  
established college system. In the first place, it divides each  
class, not numerically or alphabetically, but according to the math-  
ematical tastes and attainments of the members. In the second  
place, it assigns the select divisions containing all the best mathe-  
maticians, to the Instructor, and leaves the remainder to the care  
and instruction of the Professor. This may be a pleasant ar-  
rangement for the Instructor, but it is hard on the Professor.  
And it would seem that the select divisions also would ordi-  
narily get better instruction from the Professor than from the  
Instructor. The statutes as finally fixed, however, allow of  
some exceptions and relaxations in this part of the system. The  
effect of the system on the whole class, and its bearing on the  
principles and results of college education, constitute the most  
vital question. On the one hand it is a great loss, almost a  
calamity, to a class to have all the best scholars in any depart-  
ment taken out of it. It is like taking all the salts out of an  
effervescing fountain. On the other hand, the best scholars are  
doubtless kept back more or less by the old system of numerical  
divisions. On the whole, the Walker system is perhaps particu-  
larly adapted to the mathematical department. It has certainly  
worked well, in making some better mathematicians than we  
otherwise should have made, although I must think, it has at  
the same time lowered somewhat the general standard of mathe-  
matical discipline and attainment. The Professors in the other  
departments, I am sure, would be reluctant to be subjected  
to all its rules and regulations. Messrs. William B. Graves of  
the Class of '62, Thomas D. Biscoe of '63, and John K. Richard-  
27  
 
son of '69, have successively filled the office of Walker Instruc-  
tor in Mathematics, in such a manner as to meet fully the high  
Church (1864), another gentleman, without any knowledge of  
that donation, offered to the Trustees, in a letter to the Presi-  
dent, the sum of twenty thousand dollars as a foundation for a  
Professorship of the Pastoral Care. The same gentleman had  
previously had some correspondence with Dr. Hitchcock as well  
as with Dr. Stearns on the same subject. At their annual meet-  
ing in July, 1864, the Trustees gratefulty accepted the founda-  
tion and appointed the President and Dr. Vaill a Committee to  
confer with the donor, and prepare proper statutes and plans for  
the Pastorate. At a special meeting of the Board in November,  
1866, the statutes, as approved by the donor, were reported and  
adopted by the Trustees. They provide that the Professor shall  
be designated as the " Samuel Green Professor of Biblical His-  
tory and Interpretation and of the Pastoral Care ; " and that he  
shall be the Pastor or Associate Pastor of the College Church.  
His duties shall be to preach on the Sabbath such portion of the  
time as the Trustees may think most conducive to the well being  
of the College ; to be responsible in connection with and under  
the direction of the President for the proper conducting of all  
other religious meetings in the College, provided, however, that  
in the management of this work as well as in the preaching on  
the Sabbath, such assistance may be expected from other Pro-  
fessors as shall help to secure the wisest and most powerful  
Christian influence upon the whole Institution ; to organize and  
conduct, or superintend the conducting of Bible classes; to seek  
out young men as they come to College, and exert a personal  
religious influence of Christian friendship upon them; and to  
give such instruction in Biblical History and Interpretation as  
the Trustees may direct. " Should time allow, he shall give ten  
or twelve lectures to each class successively once in their College  
course, on the subject of great examples of character, selecting  
the examples from the Sacred Scriptures or from the worthies  
of the Christian church It shall be among the leading  
 
objects of these lectures to induce a large portion of the pious  
students to devote themselves to the work of the gospel min-  
istry "When from time to time, these lectures have been  
 
delivered to eight successive classes, they shall either be pub-  
lished by approval of the Trustees or a full manuscript copy of  
them shall be deposited by the Professor in the Library for the  
use of the College, and new lectures shall be prepared by him.  
Finally, his special work shall be ' the care of souls,' in the per-  
formance of which, besides preaching, attending religious meet-  
ings, etc., he shall hold himself accessible at stated times to such  
students as may be disposed to come to him for instruction, and  
he shall endeavor to converse with others, as time and opportu-  
nity may allow, in reference to their plans for life, their religious  
experiences and difficulties, their spiritual condition and pros-  
pects, seeking first of all to bring them into an inward knowl-  
edge of the truth as it is in Jesus and building them up on the  
foundations of the gospel into the most symmetrical, powerful  
and earnest Christian character. In doing this, as in all his  
work, he shall endeavor not to exclude, but to encourage and  
make effectual the religious influence arid cooperation of the  
Faculty towards the same result, regarding himself as especially  
responsible for the promotion of the religious life of a College  
pre-eminently consecrated from the beginning to CHRIST."  
 
For special reasons the statutes permit the Trustees to elect  
Dr. Stearns the first Professor on the foundation and thus for the  
present to connect the professorship with the presidency. But  
it is expressly provided, that, " after the death or resignation of  
the office by President Stearns, a new Professor, having no  
official connection with the College, shall be appointed, and from  
time to time, as the office is vacant ; and if for twelve consecutive  
months no one is appointed, or if he denies the supreme divinity  
of the Lord Jesus Christ and the efficacy of his atonement, the  
entire endowment shall revert to the lawful heirs of the donor."  
 
Professorships of the Pastoral Charge, separate from the pres-  
idency or some other department of instruction, have rarely  
proved successful. There does not, however, seem to be any  
necessary and absolute reason why the right man, under wise  
statutes and favorable circumstances, might not make such a  
 
professorship a success. Certainly if any department requires  
the undivided and utmost energies of one man wisely and zeal-  
ously devoted to it, it is that of religious instruction and influ-  
ence. And if such a professorship can be made a success any-  
where, it can be under the wise and well-guarded statutes above  
described and with the hearty co-operation of the President,  
Professors and pious students of Amherst College. At any rate,  
let the first Professor (separate from the presidency) be selected  
with great care, and let the experiment be fairly tried.  
 
The fund was allowed to accumulate till the principal amount-  
ed to twenty-five thousand dollars, when President Stearns was  
chosen the first Professor. The clerical Professors still continue  
to preach in rotation with him ; and it is the understanding that  
whenever the professorship shall be separated from the presi-  
dency, the President and Professors will still continue to preach  
half of the time on the Sabbath, and to assist as heretofore in  
other religious meetings.  
 
During his life, the founder of this professorship was not will-  
ing to have his name mentioned. But since his decease there  
is no objection to the announcement that the founder was that  
life-long friend of Amherst College and of every good cause,  
John Tappan, Esq., of Boston. And he named the foundation  
the Samuel Green Professorship in memory of his beloved  
pastor, the first pastor of the Union Church, Essex street, Bos-  
ing up in the College, the old departments have not remained  
stationary. All the branches of the physical sciences are not  
only supported now on the Walker foundations, but have derived  
fresh life and strength from the new and rich soil into which  
they have been transplanted. From the statement which Prof.  
Snell made at the opening of Walker Hall, and which I hope to  
give entire elsewhere, it appears that " the average appropriation  
to the department of Natural Philosophy from 1828 to 1869 has  
been about sixty-five dollars per year a sum which could hardly  
funds will avail to replace many cheap-looking instruments by  
more comely and fitting ones, as well as to add a number of oth-  
ers which I have for some time wished to procure, but which  
disappointed. In 1869, the Trustees voted that Prof. Snell have  
liberty to draw on the Walker Legacy Fund for an amount not ex-  
ceeding three thousand dollars to be expended within tw r o years  
for the purchase of apparatus. Thus after many long years of  
hope deferred and personal toil and skill to make apparatus out  
of nothing, and with no place to put it in when it was made, he  
enjoys the satisfaction, not only of having a beautiful and conven-  
ient ro'ton with suitable shelves and cases for the deposit of the  
old apparatus, but .also of seeing new and choice instruments,  
works of art as well as illustrations of science, frequently arriving  
with which he may exhibit new and beautiful experiments. His  
lectures, always admirable, have grown more and more perfect  
with advancing years, expanding rooms and increasing resources ;  
and one of the pleasantest aspects of Walker Hall to his col-  
leagues and his pupils as they revisit their Alma Mater from year  
to year now, is that there they see Prof. Snell at length reap-  
ing the fruit of his labors, and his Cabinet and lectures fur-  
nished with suitable accommodations.  
 
The department of Chemistry, like the department of Math-  
ematics and Physics, has migrated during the presidency of Dr.  
Stearns, leaving the basement of the old chapel which in 1827  
seemed so ample and magnificent and was in fact in advance of  
the laboratories in other and older Colleges, and finding new  
quarters on the first floor of Williston Hall, fitted and furnished,  
by the wealth and liberality of Mr. Williston, to satisfy the de-  
mands of Prof. Clark, young, ambitious and fresh from the labo-  
ratories of Europe. Provided with an excellent working as well  
as lecturing Laboratory, conducted by scientific and enthusiastic  
Professors, with the co-operation sometimes of able assistants  
 
tions and appliances, has been allowed more time and opportu-  
nity under the presidency of Dr. Stearns than was afforded it  
under his scientific predecessor, has given increasing attention  
to Analytic and Organic Chemistry, and, in short, has endeav-  
ored not without success to keep pace with the rapid progress  
of Chemistry and the kindred sciences. From 1854 to 1856,  
Prof. 'Clark was aided in Analytic and Applied Chemistry by the  
rare talents, taste and science of Dr. John W. Mallet, a gradu-  
ate of Trinity College, Dublin, and of the University of Got-  
tingen. Dr. Newton S. Manross, another of Mr. Clark's fellow-  
students in Prof. Wohler's Laboratory at Gottingen and a Doctor  
of Philosophy of that University, gave excellent instruction here  
in this and the related sciences, in 1861-2, the first year in which  
Prof. Clark was absent as an officer in the war of the Rebellion.  
In 1867 Prof. Clark resigned his professorship in order to accept  
the presidency of the Massachusetts Agricultural College, and  
after a year's interregnum in which Mr. J. H. Eaton, of the  
Class of '65, lectured with marked success, in 1868 Prof. E.  
P. Harris of the Class of '55, then Professor at Beloit College,  
was appointed in his place. In 1869, this department at the  
same time with that of Physics, struck its roots into the Walker  
Legacy Fund, and Prof. Harris was authorized, with the advice  
and approbation of the Prudential Committee, to expend a sum  
not exceeding fifteen hundred dollars in refitting and refurnish-  
ing the Laboratory. And now during the two terms of each  
year which are given to Chemistry, not only whole classes are  
faithfully instructed in the general principles of the science, by  
lectures which they are required to attend, but the Laboratory  
proper is filled to its utmost capacity with elective students en-  
gaged in analytic experiments.  
 
Botany has, for the most part, been taught, as in former  
years, by the Professor of Chemistry. Indeed Prof. Clark bore  
the title of Professor of Chemistry, Botany and Zoology from  
1854 till 1858. In 1858, Prof. Tuckerman was appointed Pro-  
fessor of Botany, which title he has borne ever since. Only a  
few classes, however, enjoyed his instructions in this science in  
consequence of an increasing difficulty of hearing, which ren-  
 
For the same reason, however, he has only devoted himself with  
less interruption and more enthusiasm to one branch of botani-  
cal science, viz., the Lichens, in which he reigns almost sole  
monarch among American savants and is now publishing to the  
world the results of his long and patient microscopic studies of  
specimens which he has gathered in person or by proxy from all  
the mountains and glens of the western continent. " Tucker-  
man Glen " in the White Mountains was discovered by him in  
these explorations, and will be a lasting monument of his devotion  
to this science. Besides his contributions to science, this gen-  
tleman has also rendered a valuable service to the College by  
the course of learned lectures on Oriental History which he  
has given to so many successive Senior classes, while his large  
and choice private library, more rich in literature than it is even  
struction of the classes, the department of Botany, though with-  
out the title, has reverted to the Professor of Chemistry. Prof.  
Clark inspired his classes with not a little of his own enthusi-  
asm not only in the lectures but in botanical collections and ex-  
cursions. And Prof. Harris, without professing Botany, teaches  
it with the thoroughness and earnestness with which he pursues  
whatever he undertakes.  
 
On retiring from the presidency, Dr. Hitchcock expressed to  
the Trustees his willingness to retain the Professorship of Nat-  
ural Theology and Geology, giving at least twenty lectures and  
from twenty-five to thirty recitations in Geology ; twenty-five  
lectures and ten or twelve recitations in Anatomy and Physi-  
ology ; twenty-five recitations in Butler's Analogy, an,d from ten  
to twenty lectures in Natural Theology ; being released from  
the government and police of the College and from attending  
Faculty meetings ; preaching and officiating at prayers in his  
turn with the other Professors ; and receiving as his salary  
six hundred dollars one-half the sum received by the other  
Professors. This proposition was thankfully accepted by the  
Trustees ; and Prof. Hitchcock returned with the freshness of  
 
sions, explorations, and naming of mountains, to the collection  
and classification of specimens and the development and per-  
fection especially of his favorite branches, Ichnology and Nat-  
ural Theology. It was with enthusiastic delight that he saw  
the Appleton Cabinet completed, and the first floor filled with  
classified and labeled foot-marks in which the eye of his science  
and imagination could see the gigantic birds, saurians and batra-  
chians of the primeval world marching down the geologic ages,  
and the second floor filling with shells of mollusks, casts of the  
megatherium, skeletons and skins of the gorilla and other ani-  
mals, and stuffed or preserved specimens of the animal creation  
in regular gradation from the lowest to the highest orders of the  
animal kingdom. In 1858, Mr. Charles H. Hitchcock of the  
Class of '56, was appointed Lecturer on Zoology and Curator of  
the Cabinet. In 1860, as Dr. Hitchcock's health declined, an  
addition was made to his salary that he might employ such as-  
sistance as he might think needful and expedient, and from that  
time, his son relieved him by performing more and more of his  
duties until his death in 1864. With him the department died  
also. It was made for him, and he for it, and the Trustees  
have never been able to find any one to fill his place, although  
they have sought anxiously for suitable candidates. Mean-  
while the instruction in Geology has been given sometimes  
by Prof. Edward Hitchcock, Jr., sometimes by Prof! Shepard ;  
the lectures on Natural Theology as related to G-eology no one  
has attempted to give. In 1870, Mr. Benjamin K. Emerson,  
a graduate of the Class of '65 and a Doctor of Philosophy of  
the University of Gottingen, was appointed Instructor in Geol-  
ogy, and during the year and a half which has since passed  
away, he has not only taught Geology and the sciences insepa-  
rable from it by lectures and recitations with signal ability, but  
has entirely rearranged and relabeled the Geological Cabinet to  
meet the present demands of that progressive science. It is  
understood that, with the consent of the founder, the Hitchcock  
Professorship will henceforth be that of Geology and the related  
sciences ; and Mr. Emerson will be the Professor. 1 Meanwhile  
 
1 P. S. At a meeting of the Trustees in Boston, February 7, 1872, the title of the  
 
Natural Theology is provided for by ample instructions from the  
President and the Professor of Mental and Moral Philosophy, as  
ceeding the income, the Faculty volunteered to dispense with  
the services of a salaried Librarian and Curator of the Cabinet,  
and by performing without pay these and other duties, to re-  
duce the annual expenditures. Prof. Seelye took charge of the  
Library. Prof. E. Hitchcock, Jr., became Curator of the Cab-  
inet. The clerical members of the Faculty dispensed with the  
small stipend for preaching which they had been accustomed to  
receive almost from the beginning of the service in the chapel,  
some one else performed the Registrar's duties 1 without pay,  
and each officer undertook some extra work in this division  
of labor. After a year or two when the crisis was passed, this  
arrangement for the most part ceased. But from that day to  
this, the curatorship of the Zoological and Ichnological Cab-  
inet has remained in the hands of Prof. Hitchcock. Nor has he  
made it a sinecure office, but in a double sense it has been a  
labor of love. With the special assistance of Mr. A. B. Kit-  
tredge of the Class of '69, in 1869-70 he revised and relabeled  
the Ichnological Collections. In the same and succeeding years,  
he has made a special effort to increase our collections in Natural  
History by sending circulars to graduates and friends of the Col-  
lege and inviting them to replenish the Cabinet. By these and  
similar means, the Zoological collections have been continually,  
sometimes rapidly increasing, until there is already some diffi-  
culty in finding room to receive them. Meanwhile the unique  
collection of Indian Relics has grown under his fostering care  
and the munificence of the gentleman whose name it bears, into  
the Gilbert Museum, one of the richest and choicest museums of  
Aboriginal remains in the country.  
 
The history of our Scientific departments in this period would  
be incomplete, if we should not include in it some reference to  
 
to that of Geology and Zoology ; and Benjamin K. Emerson was elected to the pro-  
 
the Massachusetts Agricultural College, which is the daughter of  
Arnherst College and the natural outgrowth of our Departments  
of Physical Science. President Hitchcock was, to say the least,  
one of the god-fathers of the Institution. His Geological Sur-  
veys of the State, his Report on the Agricultural Schools of  
Europe, the Professorship of Agriculture which existed for a  
short time as a branch of the Department of Science in Amherst  
College, * were all preparatory steps towards its establishment.  
In one of her wills which was superseded, Miss Sophia Smith of  
Hatfield provided an endowment for a Department or School  
of Agriculture in Amherst College. Prof. Clark's agency in  
the location of the Agricultural College in Amherst was still  
more immediate and effective. Indeed to his influence as a  
member of the Legislature, his exertions in raising the money on  
which the location was conditioned, and his wisdom and energy  
as the first President, the Massachusetts Agricultural College  
owes its prosperity and success, if not its very existence. The  
people of Amherst, with their usual foresight and public spirit,  
first by individual subscription, but finally by a town tax, raised  
fifty thousand dollars for the purchase of a farm and the erection  
of buildings. The Trustees of Amherst College, as individuals,  
led by their President, and aided by one or two other friends of  
the Institution, became responsible for twenty-five thousand  
dollars more. By vote of the Trustees, the Library, the Cab-  
inets, the Lectures and the chapel services of the College were  
all made accessible to the officers and students of the new Institu-  
tion. The Professors and Instructors of Amherst College have  
from the first lectured and taught more or less in the Agricultu-  
ral College. In short although the two Institutions have differ-  
ent Corporations and Faculties and there is no organic connec-  
tion between them, the Massachusetts Agricultural College is  
indebted for what it is to-day and promises to be in the future,  
beyond all question and almost beyond calculation, to what it  
has received directly or indirectly from Amherst and Amherst  
College. How much benefit Amherst College has derived in  
turn and will derive from the Agricultural College is not so  
 
1 Rev. J. A. Nash was nominally Professor of Agriculture from 1852 to 1856.  
 
clear. In many respects, doubtless, the benefit will be mutual.  
At least, the two Institutions unite to make Amherst one of the  
chief educational centers of the Old Bay State.  
 
The Mathematics and the Ancient Languages have both been  
compelled to yield, these last few years, to the demands of the  
age and give up some of the time which they formerly occupied  
to the Physical Sciences and the Modern Languages. In this  
respect the Greek and Latin classics have lost ground relatively  
and absolutely, for this loss of time in College is not fully made  
up by longer or better preparation in the Academies and High  
Schools. At the same time, these studies have had to stem the  
tide, or resist the pressure of the popular sentiment in favor of  
what are called more practical and useful studies, which, like the  
materialism and skepticism of the age of which indeed it is part  
and parcel, fills the newspapers, magazines and novels of the  
day, possesses the minds of the masses, and, like an atmosphere,  
surrounds and, in spite of ever} T thing, more or less rushes into  
our institutions of learning. The ancient classics, it must be  
acknowledged, have thus lost caste and standing with a minority  
of the students of Amherst. Yet there are no studies which  
are more highly appreciated or more zealously prosecuted by the  
majority ; and there never has been a time when the major part  
of each successive class have been more enthusiastic and suc-  
cessful students of the classics, nor when we have been able to  
make a few so good classical scholars, as in the last decade of  
our history. While insisting as strenuously as ever on a thor-  
ough drill and mastery of the grammar and lexicography of the  
Languages by the Freshmen, we have been able, with the admi-  
rable helps that now exist, to study both Ancient and Modern  
Languages more in the light of Comparative Philology, and at  
the same time to read the classics more in their relations to His-  
tory and Philosophy and as a means of higher culture in what  
are justly called " the Humanities." There was a time, perhaps,  
some twenty years ago, when we gave up too much time to the  
analysis of words and, in order to this, gave out excessively short  
lessons. More recently we have inclined, at least during a por-  
tion of each term or year, to go more rapidly over a wider range  
 
more fully with the taste, sentiment and spirit of the Greek and  
Roman authors.  
 
Two changes have been introduced within the last fifteen  
years, which affect especially this department, and which, with-  
out question, have been both marks and means of progress.  
They were introduced by the Greek Professor. The one is  
the introduction into the recitation rooms, not only of maps  
and charts, but of photographs, engravings, casts, models of an-  
cient edifices, copies of ancient statuary in marble, bronze and  
terra cotta, busts of authors and the great men of antiquity in  
short, all such sensible illustrations as will lend to classical  
studies something of the reality and vividness which specimens  
and experiments give to the Physical Sciences, and will help stu-  
dents to reproduce men and things as they were in olden times.  
As a means of securing this end still more perfectly, we are now  
making an effort to inaugurate in Alumni Hall a Gallery of Art  
and Museum of Archaeology, which will be to the literary de-  
partments of instruction in the College what the collections in  
the Cabinets are to the scientific.  
 
The other sign and means of progress is a higher grade of in-  
struction in the lower classes secured by more permanence and  
more division of labor in the instructors of those classes. For-  
merly in this as in other Colleges, the two lower classes were  
taught almost entirely by Tutors who took the tutorship for a  
year or two only as a pleasant way of earning a little money, or  
gaining a little additional culture and reputation, and only as a  
stepping-stone to a profession or some other pursuit in life. Un-  
der these circumstances, young men coming from our best pre-  
paratory schools where they had enjoyed the instructions of able  
and learned men who had devoted their lives to the work, could  
not but feel that in this respect they were taking a downward in-  
stead of an upward step when they entered College. Some sug-  
gestions on this subject " made by the President and more fully  
developed by Prof. Tyler and the Examining Committee in their  
several Reports " received the special attention of the Board at  
their annual meeting in 1857, and, approved by them, were grad-  
ually incorporated into the system of instruction. The Tutors l  
 
1 The last Tutor so called was in 1865.  
 
gradually gave place to Instructors who remained several years  
and instructed only in one department; and some of these  
Instructors were at length made Professors. Mr. Richard H.  
Mather, of the Class of '57, was Instructor in Greek from  
1859 to 1862, Assistant or Associate Professor from 1862 to  
1868, and now he has the title of Professor of Greek and Ger-  
man. For many years now the instruction in Greek has all been  
given by Professors, and all by Prof. Tyler and Prof. Mather.  
To the scholarly attainments of the latter, his personal and pro-  
fessional enthusiasm, his skill and patience in drilling the Fresh-  
men, and his inspiring lectures on the Greek Drama, the depart-  
ment is much indebted for its success. At the same time the  
College owes not a little to Prof. Mather for his teaching and  
lectures in the German language and literature, for his zeal and  
success in raising scholarships and funds for the Museum of Art,  
and for his services in his turn in the pulpit, not to add, for de-  
clining the calls which his popularity in other pulpits has so  
often brought within his reach.  
 
The instruction in Modern Languages, also, is now given en-  
tirely by Professors; the German, by Prof. Mather, who has  
taught German more or less in connection with Greek almost  
from the first ; and the Romanic Languages, French, Italian and  
Spanish, by Prof. Montague, who was Tutor one year, 1857-8,  
Instructor from 1858 to 1864, and Professor from 1864 to the  
present time. This suggests another change in the department  
of Modern Languages, which is an improvement no less impor-  
tant than the greater permanence of the teachers in it. In all  
the earlier history of the College, French was usually taught by  
native Frenchmen or at any rate by foreigners who knew of  
course their native tongue but did not know how to teach it to  
Americans, nor how to keep order and discipline in a class of Col-  
lege students nor, as a general fact, anything else which students  
in College need to learn. For the last twenty years or more,  
Modern Languages have been taught here almost entirely by  
Americans, graduates of the College, who know the Languages  
sufficiently, who have learned them in the same way that their pu-  
pils must learn them, and who can teach, at least, the grammar and  
 
to do. Meanwhile this department has grown and expanded so  
as to meet in part at least the popular demand. For a few years  
at the beginning of our history, no provision was made for teach-  
ing Modern Languages. Before the close of the first decade,  
French began to be taught. German was introduced about the  
end of . the first quarter of a century. 1 For some years after this,  
the student could study only one of these languages, making  
his option between them, and the language of his choice he  
could study only for a single term, the last term of Sophomore  
year. Now the students are all required to study French, making  
a beginning the third term of Freshman year, and having more  
or less instruction in it each term of Sophomore year, after  
which there are three terms in which they can take French,  
German, Italian or Spanish as an elective study. Prof. Mon-  
tague has rendered an important service to the College by plan-  
ning and organizing as well as training and drilling this depart-  
ment, and by an organizing and calculating facult} 7 " which has  
kept the Registrar's books, so vitally concerning the rank of the  
students and the peace and prosperity of the Institution, with  
singular accuracy, and introduced order and method, tempered  
and Modern Languages in 1855, before the expiration of the first  
year of Dr. Stearns' presidency, having held the office only four  
years. He taught the Latin with the accuracy of a scholar and  
a severe critic, imparted new life and interest to the study of  
Modern Languages, and as a member of the Library Committee  
rendered valuable service in the selection and purchase of books  
and the cataloguing and orderly arrangement of the Library.  
A growing interest in preaching and a desire for the work of  
the ministry, somewhat quickened, it may be, by some friction in  
who bore the title of Instructor. He was Instructor here from 1844 to 1846. He  
was afterwards connected with Princeton College, and is now Professor in Lafayette  
College. He was much esteemed here for his learning and for his genial spirit.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees in 1856, Mr. Lyman  
R. "Williston, of the Class of '50, was chosen Professor in this  
department, with liberty to continue his studies another year in  
Germany. But before the expiration of the year, a change in  
his religious views and opinions made him feel that he could not  
honestly accept ; and he declined the appointment.  
 
At the next annual meeting of the Board in 1857, they elected  
Rev. Daniel W. Poor, D. D., of the Class of '37, then of New-  
ark, N. J., Professor of Latin and Modern Languages. But he  
yielded to the remonstrances of his people and never accepted  
the appointment. The professorship thus remained vacant three  
years, from 1855 to 1858. But the department suffered no se-  
rious detriment, the duties of the office being ably performed  
Payson Crowell, who had been Tutor since 1855, was chosen  
Professor of the Latin Language and Literature and Instructor  
in German. Prof. Crowell has now filled the office of Professor  
of Latin 2 thirteen years with a reputation growing every year  
for learning, humor and capacity to teach ; while he is thus  
elevating the department, he is at the same time becoming  
known to the public as a scholar and an editor of Latin authors.  
Besides Mr. Rowland and Mr. Montague already mentioned, of  
whom the former w T as Professor in all but the name in the in-  
terval between Prof. Jewett and Prof. Crowell, and the latter  
was Instructor in Latin prior to his appointment to the Pro-  
fessorship of Modern Languages, Charles M. Lamson of the  
Class of '64, Henry M. Tyler of '65, and Henry B. Richard-  
son of '69 have rendered excellent service as instructors in  
this department, some of them assisting Prof. Crowell in the  
 
chosen Professor in this department at a special meeting of the  
Trustees held in Amherst, November 21, 1853, just a year pre-  
vious to the ordination and inauguration of President Stearns,  
and in the spring of 1856 he resigned the professorship having  
held it only a little over two years. The want of a suitable house  
for his family to live in was the occasion of his leaving. The  
Trustees at their special meeting in January, 1856, voted to  
rent or build a house, and expressed a strong desire for his con-  
tinuance in the office. But he had already committed himself to  
the church at New London, and it was now too late. The Trus-  
tees and the Faculty had good reason for wishing to retain Prof.  
Field. His rare good sense and genial spirit, his refinement of  
taste and manners, his extensive and thorough acquaintance with  
English literature and his high and just appreciation of the old  
English classics, qualified him well for a professorship in Col-  
lege, and especially for the Professorship of Rhetoric and Eng-  
lish Literature. These accomplishments had made his general  
influence felt when he was a Tutor, and would have made it  
still more powerful and benignant if he had remained and iden-  
tified himself with the College. It is a fact worthy of incidental  
mention, unintentional of course on the part of the appointing  
power, yet somewhat remarkable, that Prof. Field is the only  
alumnus that has ever held this professorship.  
 
Mr. James G. Vose, a graduate of Yale, of the Class of '51,  
was chosen Professor in this department at the annual meeting  
of the Trustees in August, 1856, and his resignation was ac-  
cepted by the Board at a special meeting in Boston in March,  
1865. With many of the same qualifications for the office as  
his predecessor, and continuing to hold it between eight and nine  
years longer than any who had preceded him except Prof.  
Worcester and Prof. Warner, Prof. Vose grew every year in  
the respect and affection of the students, endeared himself  
greatly to his colleagues in the Faculty, and was impressing him-  
self more and more on the style of thinking and writing in the  
College. No one can look carefully and discriminately over  
the Schedules of Commencements and exhibitions without see-  
ing his influence in the choice of subjects and the expression  
 
chair. Ordained as an Evangelist not long after he became  
Professor, ] by a Council convened by invitation of the College  
church, he preached with increasing frequency and interest in  
other churches, and feeling more and more the infelicities of  
college life and the attractions of the ministry and the pastoral  
office, he yielded at length to this growing preference; and the  
College lost a good Professor, but Providence and Rhode Island  
gained perhaps a better Bishop whose wisdom and spirit and in-  
which the} 7 accepted the resignation of Prof. Vose, the Trustees  
" made unanimous choice of Rev. L. Clark Seelye as Williston  
Professor of Rhetoric," whereby Springfield lost a Congrega-  
tional -Bishop greatly honored and beloved, but the College  
gained a Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory and English Litera-  
ture who, although he came with the avowed expectation of  
staying only a few years and then resuming the ministry, is  
proving himself more and more the right man in the right place,  
is resisting attractive calls to the pastoral office and devoting  
himself most assiduously to the study of English Literature in  
its very sources and to the duties of his office, is preaching  
powerfully by the life as well as the lip, during the week as well  
as on the Sabbath to two or three hundred young men, and  
seems to be taking root in a College where if he only has the  
grace of perseverance, he may in due time make thousands bet-  
ter teachers and preachers, authors, savants and scholars for his  
influence over them. In order to relieve the burdens of the  
Professor and at the same time to meet the growing demands of  
the department, an Instructor in English and in Elocution was  
appointed in 1868, his salary being paid for several years by Mr.  
Williston. The instruction of the lower classes in spelling and  
punctuation and in the analysis of English authors, in the same  
manner as the Greek and Latin classics, were among the branches  
thus provided for. The examination of candidates for admission  
 
ditioned on spelling. But I apprehend it proves somewhat  
like the labors of Sisyphus for there is no labor more hope-  
less or more thankless than the effort to repair by subsequent  
instruction such defects in early elementary education. Yet ifc  
seems almost indispensable to do what can be done at this late  
stage to save young men from the mortification, perchance the  
serious injury which they must otherwise experience. Many  
years ago a graduate, in other respects well qualified for the  
place, lost a professorship in this Institution in consequence of  
the bad spelling of his letters in the correspondence on the sub-  
ject. Mr. Charles M. Lamson of the Class of '64, Mr. E. H. Bar-  
low of '66, Mr. Elihu Root of '67, and Mr. Robert M. Woods of  
'69, have filled the Instructorship in this department for one year  
each. With the exception of Mr. Lamson, they have all ren-  
dered assistance also to Prof. Hitchcock in the gymnasium, thus  
relieving the Professors in two departments which at certain  
points are somewhat closely related to each other, and both of  
which involve labors almost without end.  
 
The Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory has received the as-  
sistance also of a more experienced elocutionist for a limited  
portion of each year, particularly in training the speakers for  
the exercises of Commencement week. Mr. J. P. Lane, of  
the Class of '57, began to render this service while a student at  
the Theological Seminary in Andover, and continued to render  
it for some years after his settlement in the ministry in Whately,  
much to the satisfaction of the Faculty and the profit of the  
students. Rev. J. W. Churchill, of Andover Seminary, now  
spends some weeks here every year as Lecturer and Teacher  
of Elocution ; and it is not the fault of the Professor and his  
aids, nor of the College, if the students are not accomplished in  
this most important department.  
 
Next to the department of Rhetoric and Oratory, the Profess-  
orship of Mental and Moral Philosophy is that in which there  
has been the least permanence. Yet on the whole, the term of  
office in this department has been increasing. With the ex-  
ception of Prof. Fiske who held the office eleven years, there has  
 
Prof. Haven eight years, while the present incumbent has nearly  
completed fourteen years.  
 
Prof. Haven's term of office was almost equally divided be-  
tween the presidency of Dr. Hitchcock and that of Dr. Stearns.  
He taught the Scotch philosophy the philosophy of Sir William  
Hamilton with a logical clearness and force worthy of the sys-  
tem, and with a felicity of illustration and a vein of humor that  
were all his own. The text-books in Mental and Moral Philos-  
ophy which he wrote while he was here, have been widely used  
in schools and colleges and are well known to the public. A dili-  
gent student, a good scholar, an acceptable teacher, a popular  
preacher, a lucid writer and a ready platform speaker, 1 he held a  
position in the College and the community which might well have  
satisfied the ambition of anyone. But no sooner had he written  
and published on the whole range of subjects which he taught,  
than growing weary of the routine, he sought a new field of study  
at the annual meeting of the Trustees in August, 1858. Believ-  
ing the transcendental philosophy as represented by Dr. Hickok  
to be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, he  
carries it with him as a personal presence, diffuses it around him  
as an atmosphere and breathes it as an element of life and power  
into all of his classes. At the same time accepting the religion of  
Christ as a revelation from God for men, and Christ himself as  
Immanuel God with us God manifested in the flesh he holds  
up that religion as truth without any mixture of error, that life  
as perfection without any mixture of frailty, and makes his pu-  
pils feel that to become Christian philosophers, Christian schol-  
ars, Christian ministers, Christian men, is the highest aspiration  
pleasantry. Called on for an after-dinner speech as President of the Alumni at the  
first Commencement at which President Stearns presided, after many pleasant and  
complimentary allusions, he closed by saying, " After all I do not see how a ship is  
 
lished nothing in mental or moral science. He delivers few writ-  
ten lectures. Not confining himself to any written or printed  
form, he is himself the living lecture, the living text-book.  
Reading everything, and remembering everything that he reads,  
he communicates the results in a living form to his pupils. Em-  
bodying in himself all that he would teach, he infuses himself  
into those who are under his instruction. To this end beside the  
recitation hour, he sets apart an hour, sometimes hours, daily for  
conversation with students, counting no amount of time lost  
which he can spend in moulding them by his influence. In short  
born and trained to be an educator, like Socrates, teaching is his  
business, teaching is his vocation, teaching is his mission. His  
method of teaching is the Socratic method, and if we have a Soc-  
rates living and moving among us in our day, it is Prof. Seelye.  
He has been tempted by calls without number to churches, to the  
presidency of other Colleges and to professorships in Theological  
Seminaries, but a higher call made him deaf to all these solicita-  
those who have been associated in the government and instruc-  
tion of the College under the presidency of Dr. Stearns: George  
N. Webber, Reuben M. Benjamin, Edward P. Crowell, John M.  
Greene, Edwin Dimock, Edmund M. Pease, William L. Montague,  
Asa S. Fisk, Henry S. Kelsey, Lyman S. Rowland, John Avery,  
Nathaniel Mighill, Elijah Harmon, and Thomas D. Biscoe. In  
1865 the title became extinct, or rather gave place to that of In-  
structor. Seven of these gentlemen have since been Professors  
in this or other Colleges. Two of them are licensed preachers,  
one a lawyer and one a physician.  
 
With the trifling exception of a choice between French and  
German in the third term of Sophomore year, there were no op-  
tional studies prior to the presidency of Dr. Stearns. In 1859-60,  
" annuals " having now taken the place of the " Senior Examin-  
ation " on the whole course, " elective studies in the several de-  
partments " took the place of reviews preparatory to that exam-  
ination in the third term of Senior year. Since that time they  
 
year. They are still confined to the last two years of the course,  
and further limited to certain terms of those two years and to  
certain studies of those terms. Indeed all the Senior studies,  
distinctively so called, and all the properly Junior studies, to a  
certain extent, are required, and the optionals come in only when  
time can be spared or saved from these required studies, in order  
to afford students an opportunity to pursue a favorite branch  
further to such an extent as is compatible with the general dis-  
cipline and culture which are deemed essential to the idea of  
College education. Besides the option between some of the less  
important modern languages, there are in fact only four terms  
in the entire four years, viz. : two in the Junior and two in the  
Senior year, in which optionals are allowed, and then only one  
of the three daily studies of each class is optional and that some-  
times oTily for a part of the term. So that only a small fraction  
of the entire course, not more than one-twentieth certainly, is  
now given to elective studies not enough surely to alarm the  
most conservative alumnus or friend of education. The whole  
system is as yet only an experiment. The details are not settled.  
The principle only is established. Probably as we can gain time  
by a higher standard of examination for admission, and by better  
methods of teaching, more scope will be given to optional courses  
of study which will allow each student to prosecute to some ex-  
tent special branches and enable the College to send out some  
superior scholars in all the departments. But there is no dis-  
position in any of the present Faculty to make the College an  
American University (sit venia verbo !) or to sacrifice any of  
the humanities or the disciplinary studies which constitute the  
essential characteristics of the American College.  
 
The views of the President on this subject, published with the  
sanction of the Trustees and representing in the main doubtless  
the sentiments of the Faculty, are thus expressed in his Address  
at the opening of Walker Hall : " In the latter part of a College  
curriculum, when the foundations of intellectual manhood have  
been broadly laid, optional courses, carefully arranged and adapted  
to the mental needs and aptitudes of students, and capable of such  
combinations as would allow of long-continued attention to spe-  
 
tunities ; while others would enjoy special advantages in the re-  
maining departments. I say, optional courses, instead of random  
choices in heterogeneous studies. In this way, discipline and  
training would go on, and preparation for professional schools be  
secured; Avhile the joy of successful study would be increased,  
plea for Science for Modern Science, for such an address the  
occasion required. But it was, at the same time, a generous,  
hearty and able defence of Mathematics, of Ancient and Mod-  
ern Languages, of English Literature, of History and Mental  
and Moral Philosophy, of all the old and time-honored studies  
Avhich link the scholar to the human race and the ages, with all  
the additions and improvements suggested by modern wisdom  
and experience. To the question, how shall we find time for  
the new studies, he answers : by requiring a better preparation  
for College, by admitting carefully-arranged optional courses,  
but above all by improved methods of teaching and study. He  
concludes the discussion as follows :  
 
" As the subjects which we have now considered are under-  
going public discussion, I am anxious that the doctrine of this  
discourse may not be misapprehended. It goes for the old Col-  
lege with all possible improvements which are improvements ;  
especially for the more thorough, and for a portion of the stu-  
dents, more extensive courses in the modern sciences ; but it  
would leave the old College, the American College still without  
being Europeanized on the one hand or degraded into an inor-  
ganic mass-school of ' knowledges ' on the other. It takes no  
ground against Universities, historic or recent, but would con-  
found none of them with the College as the word has been un-  
derstood for two hundred years. It approves of professional  
schools when circumstances will allow of them, scientific and  
other schools round about the College, organic with it, if you  
please, giving life to it and receiving life from it, in the one-  
ness of a many-membered University. It would leave Amherst  
College the center of an inland educational community, with an  
 
and a Ladies' College soon to be established (though at present  
in separate organizations) round about it, capable itself of being  
developed in the direction of as many professional and other col-  
lateral schools as the needs of the public may demand and the  
munificence of the public will endow; but itself the old Col-  
lege still, with its teaching Professors, its daily recitations, its  
square-block, red-brick, time-honored dormitories (though im-  
proved) and its parental, careful supervision and moral influen-  
ces, the same old College for that broad, high, roundabout cul-  
ture which has made so many scholars, world-teachers and Chris-  
tian noblemen, for God and mankind."  
 
Thus conservative and at the same time progressive in his  
ideas of the College curriculum, he presides in the Board of  
Trustees and the Faculty and administers the government of  
the Institution with the same even balance, uniting dignity with  
unfailing courtesy and kindness, tempering justice and firmness  
with gentleness and parental love, calm however stormy the  
elements may be around him, yet alive to every breath of feel-  
ing, impulse or aspiration in young men, ruling in the hearts of  
Stearns, during the greater part of his presidency has taught  
the Senior class Butler's Analogy, and lectured on the Hebrew  
Theocracy and its Records, with particular reference to the ar-  
guments and objections of modern skeptics. More recently, hav-  
ing become Professor also of Biblical History and Interpretation,  
he has adopted a more modern text-book, and by way of supple-  
menting its defects and imperfections, extended the range of his  
oral and written lectures. For a few years, he also instructed  
the Seniors in Constitutional Law. With this exception, his  
teaching has been confined to a single term the second term  
of the Senior year. This is less instruction than was given by  
any of his predecessors very much less than used to be given  
by President Moore and President Humphrey, or any of the  
earlier Presidents of New England Colleges, and less, I must  
think, than is theoretically desirable, not to say indispensable to  
 
dents. But we have only to look at the other work which he  
has done in raising funds and erecting buildings, in administer-  
ing the discipline, and looking after the necessities of poor stu-  
dents, in the pastoral care and the representation of the College  
before the public in all the countless and endless details of  
business that now devolve on the President of any great and  
growing College and we see not only a justification of this un-  
desirable fact, but a necessity for it. And in the success and  
perfection with which all this work has been done ; in the rare  
felicity, free from outbreaks and almost from friction with which  
the internal government and discipline, (never before so fully  
conducted by the President and never before conducted so  
well), has been administered ; in the steadily increasing number  
of students (since the war) till it had reached at the Semi-cen-  
tennial a larger aggregate than at any former period ; and in the  
general growth, prosperity and reputation of the Institution  
in all these we see a proof of the wisdom and excellence of the  
administration. " Yes," we repeat the language of the Historical  
Address at the Semi-centennial, " the same wise and kind Prov-  
idence which has watched over the College from the beginning,  
and raised up the men that were needed for every emergency,  
when President Hitchcock resigned, provided just the leader  
that was needed to supplement his work, to preserve, balance  
and polish all that was worth preserving in the old, and, adding  
much that was new, to carry on the work towards perfection.  
And the younger members of the Faculty are in unison with  
the President and the older Professors in regard to the prin-  
ciples and measures of College government, the general system  
and method of physical and mental education, and the para-  
mount necessity of moral and spiritual culture above all the  
highest attainments in literature and science, while at the same  
time they bring to the accomplishment of these common ends a  
measure of enthusiasm, a breadth of culture and a wealth of  
learning which could hardly be expected of their older col-  
leagues. I say this, not because it is necessary, but because it  
is just. We who have been connected with the College dur-  
ing the larger part of the half century, so far from feeling that  
the old was better, can truly and heartily say, that the Faculty  
 
has never been constituted so entirely to our satisfaction as now.  
And while we look with the love and complacency of a father  
upon all our children of a patriarch upon all our tribes, and are  
perhaps too ready to assert more than our proper share in the  
reputation of the great and good men we have educated, sayirg  
to them as the aged Phoenix did to the godlike Achilles :  
 
" All illustrious as thou art I made thee such ; "  
children of our riper years, especially our youngest ; even as the  
Germans, however large their families become, always say : " das  
neueste, das beste " the last is the best.  
 
But this administration has not yet come to a close. Long  
may it be before its history can be fully written. Long may  
President Stearns live to preside over the College and to see  
the fruits of his wise and faithful labors ! "  
 
