CHAPTER XVI.  
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF PRESIDENT HUMPHREY AND SOME  
OF HIS ASSOCIATES.  
 
HEMAN HUMPHREY was born in "West Simsbury, now Can-  
ton, Hartford County, Conn., March 26, 1779. His father was  
a farmer in humble circumstances, but a man of good sense, un-  
blemished moral character and more than ordinary taste for read-  
ing. His mother, Hannah (Brown) Humphrey, was a woman  
of uncommon mental capacity and exemplary piety, and did  
what she could for the education of her children, fourteen in  
number, in the spelling-book, the Bible and the catechism of  
other books, the worthy couple " had not half a dozen on the  
shelf." The first seminary into which Heman was introduced  
was a barn, where he had a dim recollection of acting in an in-  
fant dialogue for the entertainment of visitors. His subsequent  
school-houses were little better than a barn, and his teachers  
were as rude and imperfect as the places in which he was taught.  
Thus going to school in the winter, if perchance there was any  
school, and working on his father's farm the rest of the year, he  
" finished " his education at the age of seventeen. The best  
part of his education, however, he got for himself from a small  
parish library, many of whose volumes, chiefly histories, he read  
in the long winter evenings by the light of pine torches or of  
the kitchen fire. From his seventeenth year he " worked out "  
on the farms of wealthier neighbors every summer and taught  
school every winter till he was twenty-five. Meanwhile, how-  
ever, he was converted, and encouraged by his pastor to study  
for the ministry. Of his conversion, he says : " If I was then  
 
he will have mercy. I then fully embraced the doctrines of  
the Shorter Catechism, and from this platform I have never  
swerved." After only six months of uninterrupted study, dur-  
ing which he made all his preparation in Greek and much of his  
preparation in Latin and Mathematics, he entered the Junior  
class in Yale College, where he graduated in 1805, receiving an  
oration for his appointment, and having " paid all the expenses  
of his own education except that some of his clothes were fur-  
nished by his mother." Thus was he fitted to preside over a  
College so many of whose students were to go through a simi-  
lar experience.  
 
Having studied divinity six months with Rev. Mr. Hooker of  
Goshen, Conn., and having been licensed in October, 1806, by  
the Litchfield North Association, after preaching three months  
as a candidate, he received a unanimous call from the church  
and society at Fairfield to become their pastor. Before accept-  
ing the call, to avoid occasions of future discord, he persuaded  
the church to adopt a fuller and more orthodox confession of  
faith, and to terminate in a satisfactory manner the half-way  
covenant system of membership. He was ordained March 16,  
1807, and his ministry in Fairfield continued about ten years.  
After two or three years of wise and faithful preparatory work,  
his labors were blessed with a revival of religion of great power,  
which " was a new thing in Fairfield and marvelous in their eyes,  
which greatly strengthened the church and changed the face of  
things in many of the leading families." Here also he took the  
lead in the temperance reformation, not only in the town but in  
the county, preaching sermons on the principle of total absti-  
nence in advance of other ministers, helping to banish the use of  
ardent spirits from meetings of the Association, and, as chairman  
of a committee, preparing an address to the churches which was  
tional church in Pittsfield, Mass., to become their pastor ; and  
the society having concurred in the invitation and agreed " to  
grant him the sum of nine hundred dollars as his stated salary  
 
the call and was installed in November. His first work here  
was the reuniting into one of two Congregational churches  
which had separated in a political quarrel. Under his wise and  
winning influence the reunion was entirely successful and the  
harmony complete. " Many anecdotes of his skill and prudence  
in winning the disaffected or the indifferent are still related Jjy  
his parishioners. One of those oftenest repeated is that of his  
conquering the heart of a farmer who had steadily refused to  
attend the Sabbath services, by visiting him in his harvest-field,  
and, without a word of professional exhortation, engaging him  
in conversation upon farming and then taking his ' cradle ' and  
the great revival in 1820 and 1821, rendered more remarkable  
by the fact that up to that time no general revival of religion  
had ever been known in the town. The awakening began in  
the spring of 1820, continued through the summer, and in the  
autumn about forty were gathered into the church as the spirit-  
ual harvest. In May of the following year, (1821,) Rev. Asahel  
Nettleton, the evangelist, came to visit Mr. Humphrey for the  
purpose of rest from his exhausting labors. But being persuaded  
to deliver an evening lecture, he saw such signs of encouragement  
that his rest was at an end. This was the beginning of a renewed  
awakening which continued all summer, pervaded all classes,  
extended to every part of the town, and changed the face of the  
whole community. " On the first Sabbath of November the  
harvest was gathered in, and a glorious harvest it was. Be-  
tween eighty and ninety, the rich and the poor, the high and the  
low, stood up together in the long broad aisle and before angels  
and men avouched the Lord to be their God and were received  
into the church." An attempt on the part of some young men  
to break up a religious service on the 4th of July by firing  
 
1 1 am indebted for this anecdote and many of the materials of this biographical  
sketch to " Memorial Sketches of Heman and Sophia Humphrey," by Rev. Drs.  
Z. M. Humphrey and Henry Neill, for the use of the family. I have also appro-  
priated freely the language of this book, especially in its citations from the letters  
 
crackers at the door of the church, marching with fife and drum  
under the windows, and at length a regular cannonade on the  
common, was turned with great skill by the preacher (Mr.  
Humphrey himself), to the illustration- and enforcement of the  
theme of his discourse, greatly increased the solemnity of the  
meeting and added not a little to the depth and power of the  
revival. These experiences together with the example and  
influence of Mr. Nettleton were fast preparing Mr. Humphrey  
tory in the foregoing pages, beginning in the autumn of 1823,  
and ending in the spring of 1845, extended over almost a quar-  
ter of a century, almost one-half of the entire existence of the  
Institution. He found it the Charitable Collegiate Institution  
at Amherst ; he made it Amherst College. He found it the  
youngest and smallest of the New England Colleges ; he made  
it second only to Yale in numbers, and foremost of all in the  
work for which it was founded, that of educating young men  
to be ministers and missionaries. He lived to see four hundred  
and thirty of those who had graduated under his eye, ministers  
of the gospel, more than one hundred, pastors in Massachu-  
setts, and thirty-nine missionaries in foreign lands. It was un-  
der his presidency that the church was organized, separate wor-  
ship instituted, the chapel built, the pulpit made a power, and  
no inconsiderable power, in the work of education, temperance,  
revivals and missions established as characteristic features of  
the College ; and the religion of Christ recognized as the fun-  
damental law of its being and the supreme rule of its every-  
day life. Dr. Humphrey also left the stamp of his character  
and influence scarcely less visible, scarcely less permanent on the  
intellectual training of the College, not so much indeed in the  
curriculum and College laws, the rules of discipline and means  
of study and methods of teaching which have been greatly modi-  
fied, but in the manner of thinking and reasoning, the style of  
writing and speaking, the tone of morals and manners and if I  
may so speak the domestic, social and civil life of the Institution,  
which bear the unmistakable seal of Dr. Humphrey's healthy,  
 
hearty, robust, common sense and practical wisdom, united with  
high moral and Christian principle. The administration of Pres-  
ident Humphrey, scarcely less than that of his predecessor, was  
our book of Genesis in which many of our organizations, usages  
and characteristic traits had their origin, and at the same time  
our Exodus when we went up out of Egypt and obtained oju*  
charter and laws when precedents were established, principles  
settled, habits formed, and that character fixed, which our Col-  
lege still retains and doubtless will retain more or less in all  
coming time when in the favorite language of the President  
whom we so much honored and loved, our Zion not only "length-  
ened her cords and / strengthened her stakes," but laid the foun-  
dations, to some extent the literary and still more the moral and  
religious " foundations of many generations."  
 
The first year after his resignation of the presidency, Dr.  
Humphrey fixed his residence with his son-in-law, Rev. Henry  
Neill at Hatfield, and occupied his time largely in revival labors  
and in the supply of vacant congregations in the neighborhood.  
But hallowed memories and beloved friends not a few of them  
his own spiritual children soon drew him to Pittsfield where  
he spent the remainder of his days, still ministering in innumer-  
able ways to the people of his former charge, still supplying  
vacant pulpits and assisting his brethren in extraordinary labors,  
still by sermons and lectures stirring up the churches to renewed  
efforts in the cause of temperance, philanthropy and Christian  
missions, still guiding by his wisdom and gracing by his presence  
the anniversaries of the great benevolent societies, still instruct-  
ing and delighting the religious public, now and then with a new  
book, but much more frequently with articles just as fresh and  
fascinating as ever in the newspapers. He never relinquished  
his regular habits, never forsook his study. There from nine  
o'clock in the morning till the bell struck for dinner he spent  
the hours in writing sometimes a chapter of a book, sometimes  
a communication from " The Old Man of the Mountains," some-  
times a letter to a friend, or a few pages of a sermon or auto-  
biographical reminiscence. He never ceased to love Amherst  
College. Again and again he was present at Commencement ;  
 
ternal counsels as well as instructive and delightful recollections  
of College life which he gave them at their annual reunions.  
The evening of his life was as tranquil and sunny as its mid-day  
was rough and stormy. His last public effort was a sermon  
which, at the request of the clergymen of Pittsfield, he deliv-  
ered at a Union Meeting on the day of National Fasting and  
Prayer, January 4, 1861. The occasion the outbreak of the  
Southern rebellion roused him like an old war-horse who snuffs  
the battle from afar. He wrote with a force of argument, with  
a fervor of eloquence, with a religious and patriotic fire not in-  
ferior to that which great occasions called forth from him in his  
best days. He spoke in clarion notes that thrilled and astonished  
the whole assembly. The discourse was published by request  
of Gov. Briggs and other leading citizens of Pittsfield, and must  
strike every one who reads it as it did all who heard it, as a  
most " remarkable discourse to have been prepared and delivered  
by a man standing on the edge of his eighty-third year." J  
 
As he drew consciously near to death, he was at first, as might  
have been expected from his temperament aud his religious  
views, solemn, then peaceful, and at length joyful, at times  
even full of triumph as if he already heard the music and saw  
the glories of the upper world. He died at Pittsfield, April 3,  
1861, in the eighty-third year of his age. An immense congre-  
gation crowded the church at his funeral. Rev. Dr. Todd  
preached a highly appreciative funeral sermon. As the people,  
mourners all, passed around through the aisles to take a last  
look of their friend and father, Gov. Briggs came and stood by  
the representatives of the College, Prof. Snell and myself, and  
talked long, lovingly and reverently of "the great and good  
man," for he insisted that Dr. Humphrey was not only good  
but great, asking with an earnestness approaching to indigna-  
tion, " Who is entitled to that epithet if not a man of so much  
magnanimity, and so much wisdom." His body rests in one of  
the most beautiful spots in the Pittsfield cemetery beneath a  
broad, square and massive monument of granite, than which  
nothing more appropriate could have been selected to express  
his character.  
 
Of medium height, well-developed frame and strong constitu-  
tion, with black hair, dark, mild eye and a well-balanced bilious  
temperament, he was a healthy, robust, well-proportioned man  
in body, mind and heart. There was nothing morbid about him,  
in his physical, mental or moral constitution. His strength lay  
very much in the symmetry of his character and the perfect  
balance of all his powers and faculties. This made him a man  
of practical wisdom and judgment. Dr. Todd says of him : " A  
rare thing it is to find a man who has lived more than fourscore  
years always in action who has said and done so few unwise  
things as President Humphrey. It is an original gift. Those  
who have gone to him for counsel, those who have acted with  
him on committees or in ecclesiastical councils, those who have  
wrestled with him in deep discussions in ministerial meetings,  
those who have sat under him as an instructor or pastor, have  
all, without dissent, accorded to him the appellation of ' a wise  
man.' On all moral questions his instincts were quick and  
unerring."  
 
He had a lively fancy, enjoyed a joke, indulged in genial and  
playful conversation, and a vein of humor and pleasantry often  
illumines his writings. But strong common sense and deep  
moral earnestness are his most marked and unfailing character-  
istics. His integrity and honesty in business transactions was  
proverbial. He once purchased a horse of a man who, while  
accepting the price offered, told him that the horse was worth  
ten dollars more. After trying the animal, Dr. Humphrey was  
satisfied that the dealer was right in his estimate, and returning,  
insisted upon his accepting the extra sum. Few men have lived  
so nearly up to the standard of the golden rule. His unselfish-  
ness was conspicuous in all his private and public relations. At  
the same time his humility and meekness were equaled only by  
his magnanimity. This last word has been used repeatedly of  
Dr. Humphrey. No other word expresses so fully his character.  
I have never heard the epithet applied so often or so justly to  
any other man. Always magnanimous, in his later years, es-  
pecially in his frequent visits to Amherst, he was pronounced  
by all who saw him as magnanimity impersonated.  
 
need not be said to any one who is acquainted either with his  
history or his writings. His ordinary sermons were plain, simple,  
direct, searching, applying the word of God, especially his law,  
directly to the hearts and consciences of his hearers. His occa-  
sional discourses rose with the occasion, often to the highest  
pitch of argumentative and impassioned eloquence. His style,  
robust, manly and bold, was chiefly marked by its fitness and  
transparent clearness. His well-chosen words and compact sen-  
when he went abroad and ceased to teach the Senior class Men-  
tal and Moral Philosophy, he was in almost constant communi-  
cation with the religious newspapers, especially the New York  
Observer. He wrote also for the religious reviews and monthly  
periodicals. His earlier papers of this kind appeared in The  
Panoplist and The Christian Spectator. He gave to the public  
some twenty-five or thirty sermons and addresses on various  
special occasions, and left, besides, published works to the  
amount of eleven volumes. Among the former, the most cele-  
brated was his " Parallel Between Intemperance and the Slave  
Trade," which although leveled directly at intemperance, was a  
scarcely less formidable indictment of slavery. Of the latter, the  
" Tour in France, Great Britain and Belgium," in two volumes,  
has had the widest circulation. Dr. Humphrey's accurate ob-  
servation, practical wisdom and racy style all appear to advan-  
tage in his published travels.  
 
Dr. Humphrey was not an acute metaphysician nor learned  
in the History of Philosophy. Hence he was not distinguished  
as a teacher of Mental Science. But his strong common sense  
and his right moral feeling saw right through the sophistries of  
Paley's Moral Philosophy, and his classes enjoyed a rare treat in  
seeing him demolish the whole fabric and build up a better system  
on the ruins. His talks on the Catechism every Saturday were  
also interesting and instructive. Nowhere, however, did his wis-  
dom and moral greatness shine so brightly as in his counsels to  
young men ; and, with the exception perhaps of some of his ser-  
 
at the beginning of their course and his truly parental advice to  
the Seniors just before their graduation, will linger the longest  
in the memories of his admiring and loving pupils. His warn-  
ings and admonitions to professors of religion at the opening of  
a revival, his advice to anxious inquirers, and his instruction to  
young converts were also marked by the same excellences. J  
little less distance, reserve and apparent coldness of manner, a  
little more of sympathy and personal magnetism would have  
added greatly to Dr. Humphrey's popularity and enthroned  
him in the affections of all his pupils. But his wisdom and  
weight of character greatly overbalanced all defects; and the  
earlier graduates after the first year or two of his presidency,  
and all his later pupils who knew him and saw him without  
prejudice, will never cease to venerate him as a father and a  
sage and to rank him among the wisest and best of men.  
 
The portrait of Dr. Humphrey which hangs in the College  
Library, was placed there by the alumni shortly after his resig-  
nation. It was voted at the annual meeting of the Society of  
Alumni, and the expense was paid by the spontaneous contri-  
ample proof of what has just been said of Dr. Humphrey.  
They abound also in anecdotes illustrative of his wa}^ of dealing  
with students. I can not withhold an extract or two.  
 
" President Humphrey's Freshman Lectures were a great  
treat. It had been the fashion in the classes just before us l to  
abuse the Doctor. That was not our fashion. We liked him  
and admired him. He was ageing a little ; his fingers were un-  
steady in picking up the lots. But for talks like these Fresh-  
man Lectures, he must have been just perfectly ripe and mellow.  
It was delightful to hear him preach. The peculiar shrewdness  
of his remarks on character and the wisdom of his maxims of  
conduct were so set off by perfect Socratic, or Baconian, or  
Solomonian illustrations that they produced the effect of strokes  
of wit. I remember well how his reproving eye one Sabbath  
morning brought me to the consciousness that I had been  
 
1 The writer, Prof. F. A. March, was of the Class of '45, his last Senior class.  
 
smiling out in meeting. I suppose they were unch archly smiles,  
but he hit things so pat. In the Freshman Lectures, he had  
free scope for his wit and wisdom. He described and advised  
about habits of eating, drinking, sleeping, bathing, care of rooms,  
dress, hats, canes, he didn't like canes, nor wearing hats in his  
study, nor dogs, nor horses for students. He advised us about  
methods of study, and methods of meeting Sophomores and Pro-  
fessors and the like. We were called up to these lectures from  
the games of the campus, and the time was taken from our  
hours of exercise. We often left with regret our foot-ball com-  
bat with the Sophomores. But we liked the lectures and the  
Doctor notwithstanding. We had little intercourse with him  
out of the lecture-room. He was always busy, and looked on  
his visitors as I have since seen Wall street lawyers in full  
practice. His look meant business ; kindly but a little frosty.  
He grew on us, however, and his lectures afterwards on Moral  
Philosophy and the Bible completed the impression of our ear-  
lier years. We were the last class to hear his course and we  
all felt when we parted with him on his retirement, that he  
carried full sheaves with him."  
 
Apropos of Prof. March's remark above about canes, the fol-  
lowing story is told of the Class of '42 who carried extravagantly  
large canes and bore them to the recitation-room sometimes  
creating much disturbance by their clatter and occasional fall.  
The class finally adopted the method of stacking the canes dur-  
ing the hour in one corner of the room. It happened once that  
a single cane fell down. The President eyed it sharply for a  
time as if it were a war-club portending blood, and then and  
there deputed one of the gravest and most muscular men in the  
class to carry it and put it in position with the rest. This done,  
"there is one more," said the President, pointing to a huge poker  
well blackened by the fire, which stood near the stove, " put that  
with its fellows." When that also was done, he said, " there  
now the circle is complete," and then commenced the recitation.  
The canes never made their appearance again in the President's  
recitation-room. A truly Socratic homeliness and shrewdness  
often gave point to his reproofs. At the same time there was a  
 
dared to trifle. I well remember once seeing him come suddenly  
upon a cluster of noisy and rowdy students, seizing one of the  
stoutest of them by the shoulder and shaking him thoroughly  
with the significant hint, " Here ! we must have less noise, or  
we will have fewer students."  
 
One day when the excitement of " the rebellion " was at its  
highest pitch, he went into a meeting of one of the classes, put  
aside the chairman, (now a distinguished judge on the bench,)  
took the chair himself, gave them some wholesome parental ad-  
vice, and then sent them to their rooms, very much as Oliver  
Cromwell dismissed his parliament.  
 
His wit and wisdom often took the form of apophthegms.  
More wise and pithy sayings of Dr. Humphrey are probably  
remembered by the alumni to-day than of any other man who  
has ever been President or Professor in Amherst College.  
And no wonder, for he used to read the Proverbs of Solo-  
mon every year to the students, and he advised his pupils to  
read the Sermon on the Mount every month. " It has some-  
how happened," says an alumnus, 1 " that I have had occasion  
to refer to the opinions of Dr. Humphrey in matters of Natu-  
ral Science and the sayings of Dr. Humphrey in matters of  
alumnus, " the cheerful, kindly feeling apparent in his counte-  
nance seems to be especially associated with his lips ; that of  
Prof. Hitchcock with his eyes ; but that of Dr. Humphrey,  
while it illumines the whole countenance, finds its chief expres-  
sion in that tooth which is so eager to perform its service that it  
can not stand back with the rest, but leans forward, and, when-  
ever the lips move, peeps out and delivers its message. Could  
I obtain a likeness of Dr. Humphrey which did full justice to  
that tooth, I should esteem it a treasure. . . . The general senti-  
ment in regard to him found expression in the words of Dr.  
Huntington, then a student : ' That good man whose instruc-  
tions are most highly valued by the Seniors who share them  
oftenest and are most capable of appreciating them.'" 2  
 
i Prof. C. C. Bayley, Class of '37. 2 Ibid.  
 
After somewhat copious descriptions of the Professors named  
above, some of which may perhaps find place elsewhere, the  
same alumnus proceeds to photograph some of the other Col-  
lege officers of his day, thus : " Tutor Burgess as good in intel-  
lect and heart as ungainly in appearance ; Tutor Perkins whose  
polished scholarship gave promise of what he has since become ;  
Tutor Dwight, abusing his fine mental acumen by trying to say  
things smart and witty ; Tutors Humphrey, 1 ' chips of the old  
block,' but hardly giving promise of ever equalling the block ;  
Tutor Tyler inparting such an interest to our recitations in  
mathematics that it seemed to us that he never could succeed  
in anything else ; Prof. Worcester, kind, courteous, faithful,  
Avith an inexhaustible fund of illustration and of anecdote, but  
not exactly filling a chair than which there is not another in Col-  
lege so hard to fill ; Prof. Condit, who and Prof. Worcester were  
nearly the complements of each other ; Prof. Snell, in his time  
without a rival each of these would furnish material for a  
chapter."  
 
Shall I add pen and ink sketches of President Humphrey and  
his colleagues of the Faculty, by a graduate of a class half a  
dozen years later: 2 "Of our teachers I can say, that we were  
all impressed by the stealing good sense and the courtesy of  
President Humphrey, the quiet character and exact knowledge  
of Prof. Snell, the penetrating mind of Prof. Fiske, and his  
searching sermons, at times awful in power, the great good-  
ness and simplicity, and enthusiasm of Professor, afterwards  
President Hitchcock, the (excuse me) geniality and learning of  
Prof. Tyler and his rich copiousness of discourse, the courtly  
manners and rotund utterances of Prof. Fowler, the scholar-  
ship of the Tutors, and especially the moral worth of Messrs.  
Stearns and Clinton Clark and the (then) mysterious tran-  
continued to give instruction for a year and one term after Dr.  
Humphrey retired from the presidency. But his work was  
done under the presidency of Dr. Humphrey, and was so im-  
 
portant an element in its history that a brief sketch of his life  
must here be given.  
 
Nathan W. Fiske was born in Weston, Mass., April 17, 1798.  
Up to the age of nine, he showed more of mechanical taste and  
genius than fondness for books. In September, 1813, at the  
age of fifteen, he entered Dartmouth College. In a powerful  
revival in his Sophomore year, after a severe struggle which  
ended in his full submission, not only to the law and govern-  
ment of God, but also to the Orthodox faith, he began a Chris-  
tian life and at the same time entered upon a new era of dili-  
gence and success in study. In 1817, he graduated with high  
rank in the same class with President Marsh, and the mission-  
aries Goodell and Temple. In 1818 he returned to a tutorship  
in his Alma, in which he was associated with Rufus Choate. In  
1820, he entered the Theological Seminary at Andover, where  
he remained three years, and " distinguished himself by his in-  
dustry, by his success in the department of sacred exegesis, by  
his thoroughness in the study of didactic theology, and by his  
exemplary Christian deportment." 1 On the 25th of September,  
1823, Messrs. Fiske and Warner, afterwards associates in the  
Faculty of Amherst College, were ordained together as evangel-  
ists at the Tabernacle Church in Salem, and both of them labored  
for a season as home missionaries, at the South. Before leaving  
Savannah, Mr. Fiske was appointed Professor of Mathematics  
and Natural Philosophy in Middlebury. Soon after, he was in-  
vited to supply the pulpit in Concord, N. H., during the session  
of the Legislature, and about the same time asked by letter if  
he would not become a missionary of the American Board to  
China or Palestine. He declined both these calls the profes-  
sorship because he doubted the propriety of turning aside from  
the ministry, and the missionary appointment because he seemed  
to himself wholly unsuited to the work of a foreign missionary.  
In the summer of 1824, he was elected Professor of Languages  
and Rhetoric in Amherst College. After much hesitation in  
regard to his duty, he accepted the Professorship of Languages,  
declining that of Rhetoric, because, besides his " utter dislike  
of the duties of instruction in Rhetoric, it would be utterly im-  
 
possible for any man to fill both departments." From 1825 to  
1833, he was Professor of the Greek Language and Literature  
and of Belles-Lettres ; from 1833 to 1836 Professor again of  
Greek and Latin; and from 1836 to 1847 Professor of Intel-  
lectual and Moral Philosophy. He taught History also for some  
years, in connection with Belles-Lettres. His lectures on the  
battles of the American Revolution, illustrated by large and ex-  
cellent drawings on canvas, and exhibiting an accurate knowl-  
edge of their minutest details, were heard with great interest  
by the students, and repeated with moderate success as popular  
lectures in a few of the neighboring towns.  
 
Prof. Fiske's chief literary labor for the public was his edition  
of Eschenburg's Manual of Classical Literature. This book was  
commenced in the fall of 1834, and first published in April,  
1836, carefully revised and reprinted in a second and third  
edition, and in 1843 it was stereotyped with such revision and  
 
Few classical text-books in this country have been so generally  
adopted as this manual, or retained their place so long in the  
College curriculum.  
 
Scarcely had he finished this work, when his house which had  
been early visited with repeated afflictions in the loss of young  
children, was quite darkened by the death of his beloved wife.  
Soon it was found that his own lungs were suffering from sym-  
pathy with the disease which had carried her off, and this "dis-  
ease of the lungs, greatly aggravated by the sorrow of his heart  
and the loneliness of his home, ere long necessitated the use of  
decided measures to save his life. In the midsummer of 1846,  
the physician advised a release from all College labors, and a  
voyage. Fearing the effect of his absence on the College in its  
present critical state, he felt it his duty to remain with the hope  
of being able to carry on his department, at least through the  
first term of the next year.  
 
" But the very first week of labor," we quote from his journal,  
" demonstrated the necessity of immediate suspension. I yes-  
 
terday (September 26) held my last exercise with ray class.  
I have a strong impression that it is the last exercise I shall  
ever hold in this College. Twenty-two years have elapsed  
since I entered upon the duties of Professor, twenty-two  
classes of young men have, during this time, been more or  
less under my instruction, including over seven hundred that  
have actually graduated here, besides a large number that  
were here only a part of the course. Most gracious Redeemer,  
may thy atoning blood be applied, and all my sins of omis-  
sion and commission in relatipn to these numerous pupils be  
pardoned."  
 
On the 5th of November, 1846, he sailed from New York  
with Rev. Eli Smith for a companion and Beirut for his destina-  
tion. His journal and letters to his colleagues and other friends  
show that he enjoyed with the keen relish of a classical scholar  
and a cultivated taste every step of his voyage up the Mediterra-  
nean, stopping two or three days at Gibraltar, spending a week  
at Malta, rising at the earliest dawn and driving furiously to  
catch a glimpse of the ruins of Athens while the steamer lay  
three hours at the Piraeus ; touching at Rhodes, landing at  
Smyrna, coasting along the shores of Troy, seeing the sun rise  
and disclose a sight of unimagined splendor as he rounded  
Seraglio Point and entered the Golden Horn at Constanti-  
nople. On the 12th of January, 1847, he arrived at Beirut,  
where he remained about three months observing the customs  
and character of the people, collecting geological and botanical  
specimens for the College and greatly enjoying the society of  
the missionary brethren on that interesting field. The journey  
which he took with Mr. Whiting from Abeih by way of Sidon  
and Jaffa to Jerusalem, delighted Prof. Fiske beyond even his  
visits to classic scenes, and this sacred interest culminated in  
the enthusiasm with which he saw everything in and around the  
Holy City. But he was now to go up higher and behold the  
brighter glories of the New Jerusalem. His disease never re-  
laxed its hold on his vital organs. It was aggravated by an  
attack of ague and fever at Beirut, and perhaps hastened by  
over-exertion in his travels through Palestine, and his sight-  
 
return to Beirut, but at the end of one day's journey was  
obliged to go back to Jerusalem where, in spite of the wise and  
kind ministries of Dr. and Mrs. McGowan and other English  
missionaries, he died on Thursday, the 27th of May, 1847, just  
as the day was dawning upon the sacred city, and uttering as  
his last words, " Yes I joy in the Lord of my salvation." His  
body was laid to rest on Mount Zion beside two lamented mis~  
sionaries and within a few yards of the sepulchre of David. A  
solitary olive tree grows within the little walled enclosure, and  
the spot is marked by a simple slab with a Latin inscription, fur-  
nished by the College, which attests the merit of him who sleeps  
students and alumni of the College, and their sorrow at their  
own loss was enhanced by the regret in regard to him that he  
could not have lived enough longer at least to share in the pros-  
perity that was now beginning to flow into the Institution which  
he so loved and for which he had so toiled and prayed. A let-  
ter was written by one of his colleagues informing him of the  
grant by the Legislature and the large donations of Mr. Willis-  
ton the latter was just what he predicted but the intelligence  
did not reach him on earth; perhaps it was among the good  
news that greeted him on his arrival in the better land.  
 
A narrative of his journey up to Jerusalem and his death  
there, written by his fellow-traveler, Mr. Whiting, was read by  
Prof. Tyler in the College chapel, Commencement morning, to  
a large assembly of alumni and other friends, mourners all for  
their own loss and the loss to the College which it was little  
able to bear. The Society of Alumni, at their meeting, put on  
record a just and feeling testimony to his character, scholar-  
ship and devotion to Alma Mater in her seasons of depres-  
sion and trial, voted to procure a portrait for the College  
library, which, like President Humphrey's, was paid for chiefly  
in subscriptions not exceeding one dollar each, and expressed a  
" desire that in due time some worthy tribute to his memory  
might be given to the world with a judicious selection from  
 
in requesting Dr. Humphrey to prepare and deliver an eulogy.  
It was delivered before the Faculty and the students and  
other friends in February, 1848, on the day previous to the  
College Fast. And in 1850 a volume was published by J. S.  
& C. Adams, containing a fuller memoir by Dr. Humphrey,  
thirteen selected sermons, an address at the Theological Sem-  
inary in East Windsor and a lecture on the " Unity of History  
and Providence."  
 
Prof. Fiske was an accurate and refined scholar, a deep thinker,  
a clear reasoner, a powerful preacher, a patient and thorough  
teacher, an acute metaphysician and a profound theologian whom  
God did and man did not make a Doctor of Divinity. He was  
not a popular preacher. But no man has ever preached to the  
understanding, the conscience or the hearts of students in Am-  
herst College with such overwhelming power as Prof. Fiske,  
especially in times of unusual seriousness and deep religious  
interest.  
 
As a teacher, he was generally liked by the better sort of  
students and very much disliked by those who cared more  
for their ease and pleasure than they did for their lessons.  
Rogues and rowdies counted him their worst enemy. As a  
general fact, he was liked by Juniors more than by Sopho-  
mores, and by Seniors better than either ; and individual stu-  
dents, not exactly loved, perhaps, but honored and valued him  
hensive. He was too clear, discriminating and positive in  
his opinions both in theology and philosophy, to be a uni-  
versal reader or even a patient and impartial student of either  
of these departments. But what he did know he knew thor-  
oughly what he believed he believed with all his mind and  
might what he loved he loved with all his heart, and there-  
fore could teach with rare skill and power. Faith in the  
providence of God and in the gospel of Christ was the con-  
trolling principle of his life. To please and honor God, his  
 
the wisdom of the process and all the success of the result.  
" I desire to express my gratitude to God," says this truly  
Christian scholar in his reflections on completing the final  
revision of his Manual of Classical Literature, " for his kind  
providence in preserving my life and enabling me to get this  
work into a shape more satisfactory than it before had. I  
pray him to forgive every sinful thought and feeling he has  
seen in me in connection with this work, as well as my other  
numerous offenses. I thank him for often, disposing me to  
seek his blessing during my labors upon it, and I humbly  
implore his future blessing upon it that it may be made an  
instrument and help in promoting useful knowledge, and that  
it may never in a single instance be the occasion of error or  
sin to one of my fellow-creatures." The posthumous volume,  
edited and prepared with a memoir by Dr. Humphrey, and  
entitled " The Life and Writings of Prof. Fiske," is a book of  
no ordinary worth which ought to, and in an age less prolific  
of ephemeral productions would, perpetuate not only the mem-  
ory but the influence of this truly extraordinary man. The  
memoir is appreciative, instructive, inspiring. The discourses,  
chiefly sermons, are clear, strong, analytical, logical and at the  
same time "terribly earnest" like those of President Edwards,  
flashing conviction upon the conscience like the Mosaic law,  
threatening retribution like the old prophets, radiant also with  
Christian truth and the doctrines of the gospel, but somewhat  
deficient in the mellow light of the Christian graces, faith, hope,  
love and joy.  
 
Reminiscences of the wit and wisdom of Prof. Fiske and of his  
 
of plaster, put upon the walls of his recitation room, having  
frozen one night, exhibited in the morning a kind of frost-work  
forms and figures which bore a striking resemblance to the foot-  
marks recently placed in the geological cabinet. " Behold," said  
Prof. Fiske to his class, " Prof. Hitchcock's bird-tracks."  
 
" Prof. Fiske once asked me," writes an alumnus of the class  
of '37, 1 " what sent me from the shadow of his Alma Mater in  
New Hampshire down to Amherst. I told him that as potent  
an influence as any was Prof. Hitchcock's ' Dyspepsy Fore-  
stalled and Resisted.' He laughed and said, ' I will tell Prof.  
Freshman year. At one of our first recitations to him, a class-  
mate had translated a passage as I thought very creditably.  
Prof. Fiske asked him, ' How did you translate &/?' He replied  
promptly, ' That can not be translated.' ' Ah ! well, how did  
you translate ys r ? ' ' The same is true of that,' and so on, with, I  
think, five particles in the same sentence, which the student at  
length justified himself in not translating by referring to the  
authority of his teacher in the Academy. ' So then,' said the  
Professor, ' you find the Greek language lumbered down with a  
large amount of useless matter, do you ? ' Prof. Fiske then re-  
ferred to a sentence in a past lesson in which the same particle  
occurred, and then another ; and so on until we were all made  
to feel the force of the particle if it was not to be translated.  
He was, I think, the best teacher of Languages, without excep-  
tion, from whom I ever received instruction."  
 
It was this nice analysis and discrimination of the Greek par-  
ticles that gave Prof. Fiske the sobriquet of Kai-yaQ by which he  
was familiarly known among the students. He was also not  
unfrequently called by the name by which Aristotle was known  
in the school of Plato, viz., Intellect or Nov$, and for the same  
"nor the distinctness with which that feeble voice, but just  
above a whisper, was heard in the remotest corner of the chapel,  
while the most verdant Freshman would almost suppress his  
breath lest his breathing should become audible in the general  
stillness ; and I remember how the clock, which ordinarily kept  
quiet, occasioning no disturbance, would take advantage of  
 
such times and repeat its ' Forever, never, never, forever ' with  
an energy which seemed to indicate that it never expected  
another so favorable an opportunity."  
 
His kindness, as well as faithfulness, in administering reproof  
to individual students is illustrated by the following instance :  
" I had been seen looking on when a student who had been sus-  
pended for a season, was cheered as the stage drove off with  
him. Prof. Fiske was appointed to ask me if I cheered with  
the rest. I said I had not, and he at once replied that as a Col-  
lege officer he was satisfied. ' But,' said he, ' I was your father's  
friend, and I think I am your friend. I owe your father a debt  
of gratitude I can never repay, for to his kind and faithful  
words while I was in College, I owe under God my having been  
brought to Christ. And now let me, as your friend and your  
father's friend ask, would it not have been better if you had not  
been seen even as a looker-on ? Did not your presence give  
countenance to the unlawful proceedings ? ' I was won by his  
frank kindness, and acknowledged that it would have been bet-  
ter had I kept entirely away from the scene. With deep grati-  
fully written without some mention of Mrs. Humphrey, Mrs.  
Hitchcock, Mrs. Fiske, and other noble women who were not  
only helpmeets of the officers, but mothers to the students,  
especially students in indigent circumstances, and foster-mothers  
of the Institution. Nor ought we to pass over in silence Mrs.  
Dickinson, Mrs. Montague, Mrs. Merrill, Mrs. Strong, and  
others in the very beginning of our history who ministered to  
the men that laid the foundations and erected the first building,  
and then joined with the forementioned ladies in ministering to  
the necessities of the poor young men who were preparing to  
preach the gospel. These, and other ladies of Amherst, early  
organized a Sewing Society for the express purpose of sewing,  
knitting and mending for this class of students. In an age  
 
1 Kev. Daniel H. Temple, Class of '43. There is a biography of Prof. Fiske in  
 
when students were not too proud to wear mended and home-  
made garments, they made not a few articles of wearing ap-  
parel, and very often mended garments when it would have  
been easier to make new ones. An Amherst lady now living  
remembers hearing Mrs. Humphrey say of a coat which she had  
in hand for repairs : "I have already given this coat new lining,  
new facing and new sleeves', and now it has come back again to  
have all the rest of it made new." Whether the ladies discussed  
the question of identity over this old coat, as the Athenians did  
over the sacred ship which for so many ages went to Delos, we  
have not learned. Not unfrequently in such cases the more  
practical question, " What is to be done with the old coat," was  
solved by giving the poor student a coat that had been some-  
what worn by the President or one of the Professors.  
 
Mrs. Fiske was for several years the ruling spirit of these cir-  
cles. With all her delicacy of health and refinement of taste,  
there was no garment so poor or so filthy, that she would not  
put it through. Or if perchance the clothes that came in, were  
past mending or cleansing, she knew how to give the students  
the hint without giving offense. When other ladies were per-  
plexed with such cases and perchance quite reduced to despair,  
Mrs. Humphrey would say, "Mrs. Fiske can manage it." The  
latter had made herself so much the mistress of all the mys-  
teries of mending and making, that she was once asked if  
she had not learned the tailor's trade in her youth. In tell-  
ing this story to one of the ladies of the present Faculty  
long after, Mrs. Fiske said, " she was never so proud in her  
life." Yet she had been brought up in luxury and refine-  
ment, was accustomed to the best society in Boston, could  
tell a story as well as Miss Edgeworth or Mrs. Hannah More,  
and left behind her volumes of notes and letters to her  
friends that would hnve done honor to the pen of Lady Mary  
Wortley Montague. Mrs. Humphrey was a model housekeeper  
and, with a large family to be supported on a small salary, must  
have been often severely tasked to make both ends meet. But  
her ministries to the poor and the sick, the dying and the dead,  
were unceasing. At the same time, she was every inch a queen  
 
she mcrved. The Martha and Mary of the Gospels were harmo-  
niously united in her. Mrs. Humphrey survived her husband  
several years, and died at Pittsfield, December 13, 1868, in her  
eighty-fourth year. Mrs. Fiske died in middle age, February  
21, 1844, passing over the river by so quick and easy a step, and  
preceding him by so brief an interval, that she seemed to be all  
the while standing on the other bank, waiting to welcome him  
to their heavenly home. Scarcely had she left us for the better  
land, when she was followed by another lady of similar accom-  
plishments, Mrs. Fowler, the daughter of Noah Webster, who  
in her youth had adorned the society of Amherst and who,  
returning in middle life and with delicate health, remained with  
us only long enough to win the admiration and love of all  
by her rare virtues and graces.  
 
" Amherst was fortunate," writes an alumnus from whom we  
have already quoted, "in its instructors and not less in the five  
Faculty matrons whose intelligence, sweet dignity and even  
motherly influence were felt by all who were in College long  
enough to come under that influence. My personal relations  
brought me more into the society of that rare and saintly  
woman, Mrs. Fowler. The occasional tea-drinkings at the Pro-  
fessors' houses were always pleasant, free, improving to us and  
in affectionate remembrance by the alumni and who ought not  
to be overlooked in this History. Lest there should not be a  
more convenient opportunity I advert to them here. I refer to  
those whose occupation and whose delight also it has been to  
make a home for successive generations of students. There are  
those who have taken boarders only as a means of making-money  
or gaining a subsistence. But there have always been others,  
most of them widows, many of them " widows indeed," who have  
cared for their boarders as if they were their own sons, and  
whom their boarders, in turn, will always remember with not a  
little of the honor, affection and esteem which they bear to their  
own mothers. Some of these, like Mrs. Montague and Mrs.  
 
Merrill, whom we have already mentioned, were here when the  
College was founded, and having boarded successive classes of  
the earlier students in whose persons they ever after felt that  
they had " entertained angels unawares," have long since de-  
parted to their reward. Others, like Mrs. Ferry l and Mrs. Lin-  
nell not to name any who are still engaged in this good work  
have continued almost to the present day, and the Christian  
homes which they have furnished to scores and hundreds of  
liar mobility and sensitiveness of the incumbents (for Professors  
of Rhetoric and Oratory, like poets and musicians, have gener-  
ally been an irritabile genus^), the tenure of office has upon an  
average been shorter in this department than in any other. It  
had four incumbents during the administration of President  
Humphrey. Prof. Worcester held it nine years ; Prof. Condit,  
three ; Prof. Fowler five ; and Prof. Warner, nine. The last  
entered upon the office only a short time before Dr. Humphrey  
left the presidency, and his term of office falls for the most  
part under the administration of President Hitchcock. Of the  
first, we have given a biographical sketch in a former chapter.  
The other two still live to fill and adorn other stations, and  
their biography must be written by those who come after us.  
A few words only can here be said of them in their connection  
with Amherst College.  
 
Rev. Jonathan B. Coudit was chosen Professor of Rhetoric  
and Oratory at the annual meeting of the corporation in August,  
1835, and entered upon the duties of the office at the beginning  
of the next collegiate year while Dr. Humphrey was traveling in  
Europe. He brought with him a high reputation for scholarship  
in the College of New Jersey at Princeton, and for pulpit elo-  
quence from his pastorate at Longmeadow, Mass. Perhaps the  
remembrance of his preaching is more vivid than that of his  
 
cal Seminary rather than a Professor in College. And it was,  
in part at least, his preference of another sphere of labor, that  
brought his connection with the College to so early a termina-  
tion. Still he was highly esteemed by the students as a gentle-  
man of cultivated manners and refined taste. He left his im-  
press pretty distinctly on the elocution of the classes that came  
under his training. He was himself a good model in public speak-  
ing, and as such was always heard with interest in the pulpit,  
and on special occasions. With better health and more physical  
courage to encounter difficulties, he might perhaps have remained  
many years and rendered lasting service in one of its most im-  
portant departments. But the growing pecuniary embarrass-  
ments and disciplinary troubles of the College, conspiring with  
the preference of a first love for the pulpit, inclined him to listen  
to an invitation from one of the churches in Portland, Me., to  
become its pastor. His labors in College ceased with the winter  
term of 1837-8, and that accomplished gentleman, writer and  
speaker, afterwards one of the brightest ornaments of the bar and  
of Congress, James Humphrey, son of the President, supplied  
the vacancy temporarily till the appointment of Prof. Fowler.  
 
Rev. William C. Fowler was the head of this department  
from 1838 till 1843. He was appointed Professor of Rhetoric  
and Oratory, like his predecessor. But in the annual catalogue  
for 1839-40, his name appears, (without any corresponding  
vote to authorize it on the records of the corporation) as Pro-  
fessor of Rhetoric and Oratory and English Literature. At  
Middlebury College, from which he came to Amherst, he was  
Professor of Chemistry and Natural History. A graduate of  
Yale, where he was Tutor for four years, and a man of wide  
and varied learning, he was perhaps almost equally fitted for  
any of the departments of College instruction. It was easy and  
natural for him to superadd English Literature to Rhetoric and  
Oratory ; and in fact he magnified this new sphere of labor in  
which he has since won reputation as an author. At the same  
time, he gave more thorough and analytic instruction than had  
been previously given in the elements of Vocal Utterance, Or-  
thoepy and Elocution. Indeed he carried his drill in the ex-  
 
and the Professor himself. Some of the classes were particularly  
fond of applauding his own rehearsals, and more than one grad-  
uate has recorded his recollections of one occasion when finding  
it difficult to repress this vociferous applause, he told them they  
might applaud once more to their heart's content, and then it  
must cease forever. The students improved their last opportu-  
nity till it seemed as if they would raise the roof with their  
cheers, and stamp out the floor beneath their heels. President  
Humphrey, who was hearing a recitation in the next room, en-  
dured this as long as he could, and then set out to stop it,  
taking it for granted that the students were having a good time  
in one of their own class-meetings. On opening the door, what  
was his surprise to find the Professor in his chair, calm and  
smiling amid the commotion, like Neptune amid the war and  
uproar of the elements, though not equally potent to allay the  
storm. Fortunately the appearance of the President was enough  
to arrest the proceeding, and he retired without saying a word.  
It was not long after this that a note was sent in to the President  
at a Faculty meeting announcing that the students were circu-  
lating and signing a petition for the removal of Prof. Fowler.  
The business before the Faculty was perplexing and troublesome  
enough, and they were quite astounded as well as surprised  
when the President read the note aloud, remarking that the ele-  
ments were all in commotion within the College, as well as  
round about it. Prof. Fowler fell on evil times, and it certainly  
was not all his fault that he was not equal to the emergency.  
In many things he rendered valuable service to the College. He  
superintended some of the most important improvements on the  
College grounds. He wrote the circular letter to parents which  
was sent to them for so many years with good results, and intro-  
duced some of the best features of a new merit roll and system  
of discipline. He inaugurated a more systematic study of Eng-  
lish Literature and encouraged general reading, particularly the  
reading of history. But he had too exalted notions of the dignity  
and authority of a College officer. And he was never quite in  
sympathy with the rest of the Faculty in regard to temperance,  
never quite up to their standard in some other things that were  
deemed characteristic of the Institution. Perhaps, like the phi-  
 
losophers of Athens, he leaned generally to the opposition. While  
he was in Amherst he was known as a "Whig in politics, and as  
such was sent as a Representative to the General Court. Proba-  
bly he would say he has remained a Whig, an old Whig, ever  
since. But the Democratic party chose him a member of the  
Senate in Connecticut, and during and since the war both his  
votes and his writings have shown decided Southern proclivities,  
and an ultra-conservative steadfastness in maintaining " the con-  
stitution as it is."  
 
Prof. Fowler's book entitled " The English language in its  
Elements and Forms," written in Amherst, although chiefly af-  
ter his resignation, and published by Harper & Brothers, is a  
work of much research which is well adapted for a text-book,  
has been widely used in Colleges and schools, and has contrib-  
uted much to the study of the mother tongue in our country.  
Common fame ascribes to him also the authorship of a pamphlet  
entitled "Causes of the Growth and Decline of Amherst Col-  
lege," which like Gibbon's famous chapter on the growth of  
Christianity, while it assigns true causes so far as they go, yet  
ter, were some of the ablest men and best scholars that have  
ever sustained this relation to Amherst College. The entire  
list as it appears on the last triennial, is as follows : Rev. Thomas  
Power Field, D. D., Professor Rhetoric, Oratory and English  
Literature ; Rev. Clinton Clark ; Rev. John Humphrey, Pro-  
fessor Moral Philosophy arid Theology, Hamilton College ; Rev.  
William Augustus Peabody, Professor Latin and Modern Lan-  
guages and Literature ; Rev. Jesse George Davis Stearns ; Rev.  
Roswell Dwight Hitchcock, D. D., Professor Natural and Re-  
vealed Religion, Bowdoin College, and Professor of Ecclesiastical  
History, Union Theological Seminary ; Charles Ellery Wash-  
burn, M. D. ; Thomas Spencer Miller ; Rev. George Baker Jew-  
ett, D. D., Professor Latin and Modern Languages and Litera-  
ture ; Hon. Henry Martyn Spofford, Judge Supreme Court,  
Louisiana ; Rev. Rowland Ayres, Overseer of Charity Fund.  
 
One characteristic feature of this list will strike every reader :  
20  
 
they are all ministers but three, the great majority of our Tu-  
tors have become ministers, and of those three, one would have  
from 1837 to 1844 the longest tutorship in the history of the  
College was the valedictorian of his class, and began his  
Christian life the same year in which he closed his College  
course, in the revival of 1835. Without any of those qualities  
which dazzle the public eye, he had those substantial excel-  
lences of mind and heart, together with the accurate scholar-  
ship and indefatigable industry, which made him a highly re-  
spected and useful teacher of four successive classes. The re-  
mainder of his life -he spent in preaching the gospel. He died  
was well fitted to be associated with him, for he had the com-  
pensating qualities in which Clark did not excel. He indulged  
in reverie, and saw by intuition rather than mastered by toil  
and study, and shone in the tutorship with the same graces of  
taste and imagination fascinated students with the same per-  
sonal attractions and the same magnetic influence by which he  
afterwards won the heart of every man, woman and child in his  
large parishes in Charlestown and Binghamton. He died in  
1854, in his thirty-eighth year, in the very prime of his life and  
usefulness, just as he was about to enter upon a professorship  
which he was peculiarly fitted to adorn in Hamilton College;  
and the' volume of his " Sermons with a Memoir," edited and  
published by his Brother, Hon. James Humphrey, of Brook-  
lyn, N. Y., is a beautiful memorial of those two noble sons  
both, alas ! too short-lived of an illustrious father.  
 
William A. Peabody died in 1850 a Professor in Amherst  
College, and a biographical sketch of him will be given in  
the history of that period. He was Tutor from 1838 to 1840,  
and brought to the tutorship more enthusiasm for classical  
studies and more of that analytic method of studying and teach-  
 
perhaps any Tutor that had gone before him, wherein, how-  
ever, he was well followed and sustained by those who came  
after him.  
 
The three Tutors to whom we have alluded were all from  
one class the Class of '35; In Charles E. Washburn, the Class  
of '37 gave to the College a Tutor as genial and popular as he  
was scholarly and faithful, to the medical and surgical pro-  
born a mathematician as Washburn was born a linguist; and  
like his younger brother, the late lamented Prof. Miller of  
the Massachusetts Agricultural College, he inspired his pu-  
pils with his own earnestness alike, whether he taught them  
on the blackboard, surveyed the fields and roads with them,  
or pointed them to the Lamb of God that taketh away the  
sins of the world. But like that young Liverpool preacher  
whose name would almost seem to have been given him in  
some mysterious anticipation of his brief career, and whose  
footsteps he would fain have followed in the ministry, he  
was suddenly removed in the morning of life, when he had  
scarcely yet begun his life-work.  
 
Three or four Trustees whose connection with the College  
terminated in the latter part of Dr. Humphrey's presidency,  
must here receive some notice.  
 
One of these, Mr. Wilder, was a remarkable man in his day,  
and lived quite an eventful life. Born in Lancaster, Mass., May  
20, 1780, and passing his boyhood and early youth as a clerk in  
a store first in his native town, then in Gardner, and finally in  
Charlestown, and at length going into mercantile business for  
himself in Boston, he gained such a reputation for integrity,  
capacity and manly independence that William Gray, the mer-  
chant prince of Salem, afterwards Lieutenant-Governor of Mas-  
sachusetts, made him the principal agent for the transaction of  
his business in Europe. The story of his introduction to Mr.  
Gray and the brilliant operation by which he carried him cap-  
tive, is nearly as romantic and imposing as that which we have  
narrated in a former chapter of his triumph over the Legislative  
 
Committee at Amherst. The story which Mr. Sidney E. Morse  
of the New York Observer gave to the public a few years since  
of Mr. Wilder's being " the first healthy patient " who ever re-  
ceived vaccination for the small-pox in this country, is also  
equally characteristic. When the operation was generally re-  
garded as so doubtful and dangerous to health and life that no  
patients were found willing to submit to it, Mr. Wilder, then  
a clerk at Charlestown, about twenty years old, relying on the  
evidence received from Europe, promptly stripped up his sleeve  
and received vaccination. In the twenty years which intervened  
between 1803 and 1823, Mr. Wilder crossed the ocean sixteen  
times, residing most of the time in Paris, making immense pur-  
chases of silks and other French goods on most advantageous  
terms for different American and English houses, and finally  
carrying on a successful business for a firm in which he was  
himself a partner. During this time he was eye-witness to many  
stirring and strange scenes in Paris, in some of which he bore  
a conspicuous part. He represented the United States at the  
marriage of the Emperor Napoleon, the Embassador being sick  
and unable to be present. He has given a graphic sketch of  
what he saw when the Allies entered Paris with their victori-  
ous armies. He even formed a plan for the escape of the Em-  
peror on one of his (Mr. W's) vessels to America, offering him  
a shelter at his own residence in Bolton. But Mr. Wilder was  
more deeply interested in other transactions which attracted  
comparatively little public attention. His apartments in the  
Rue de Petit Carreau were the birthplace of the Paris Bible,  
Tract and Missionary Societies. " There young Prof. Jonas King  
often came while pursuing the study of Arabic with the Baron  
de Sacy, the celebrated linguist. . . . There was often heard the  
voice of prayer and praise accompanying this blessed gospel  
by many a faithful servant of Christ from America, England,  
Switzerland or France itself." 1  
 
Returning to his native land in 1823, he became the first Presi-  
dent of the American Tract Society at its organization in 1825.  
He sustained also the most intimate and responsible relations to  
the American Bible Society, the American Board of Foreign  
 
Missions, the American Home Missionary Society, the American  
Education Society and the American and Foreign Christian  
rendered most effective service by his personal influence and  
indirectly by his purse in obtaining the charter. A constant at-  
tendant of the meetings of the Board for almost twenty years,  
he spared neither time nor money in serving the College. In  
many instances when the Institution was embarrassed for want  
of funds, he became personally responsible for large sums for  
its relief. Meeting at length with reverses in business which  
stripped him of the larger part of his property, he resigned his  
place as a member of the corporation, saying that he could not  
continue to hold the position when he was no longer able to  
contribute as he had been wont to the pecuniary necessities of  
the Institution. 1 For the same reason he resigned about the  
nearly eighty-five. Mr. Wilder was imposing in person and  
manners. He knew how to do acts of almost royal munificence  
in a royal way. Perhaps he sometimes overacted so as to border  
on theatrical display. But few men have made their influence  
felt so powerfully in promoting temperance, truth and evangeli-  
cal religion as Mr. Wilder did in private, not less than public  
life, at home as well as abroad, at Ware, at Bolton, in New  
York and in Elizabeth, and wherever his lot was cast. Several  
tracts and books perpetuate the history of his successful and  
almost romantic labors of love in various spheres of action.  
 
Hon. Samuel C. Allen was elected a member of the Corpora-  
tion by the Legislature, February 21, 1826, and continued to  
hold the office till his death in 1842. He was born in Bernards-  
ton, January 5, 1772, graduated at Dartmouth in 1794, and  
 
1 Dr. Humphrey's letter in response to Mr. Wilder's letter of resignation is a  
touching expression of the extreme regret of the Trustees to part with one who  
had been with them " in six troubles, yea in seven," and grateful " acknowledgments  
for all he had done to build up and sustain this struggling Institution." See  
Memoir of Mr. Wilder, p. 286.  
 
was s'ettled as the third pastor of the First Congregational  
Church in Northfield, November 25, 1795. After a ministry of  
about two years, he was dismissed January 30, 1798, relinquished  
the ministry and practiced law in Greenfield and Northfield.  
He was a representative in Congress twelve years, and held va-  
rious other civil offices. In 1832-3, he volunteered to give a  
short course of lectures on Political Economy to the Senior  
class, for which he received the thanks of the Trustees, and  
which were heard with interest by some of the Faculty as well  
as by the students. He was a warm advocate of Free Trade,  
which was the doctrine of the text-book then used in College,  
as well as of the Democratic party to which Mr. Allen belonged.  
 
" At the time of Mr. Allen's ministry in Northfield, the Con-  
gregational denomination had not been divided into Orthodox  
and Unitarians, and he was then considered Orthodox, though  
he afterwards became a Unitarian." 1 He died in Northfield,  
February 8, 1842, aged seventyr The American Almanac for  
1843, says of him : " Mr. Allen was a man of active habits and  
vigorous intellect, and his opinions had great weight in the part  
of the country to which he belonged."  
 
Hon. William B. Banister was elected a member of the Corpo-  
ration, at the annual meeting of the Board in 1830, in place of  
Hon. Eliphalet Williams, who declined the appointment. He  
was born at Brookfield, November 8, 1773, fitted for College at  
Westfield Academy, was one term a member of Harvard Col-  
lege, but then transferred his relation to Dartmouth, where he  
graduated in 1797. He began the practice of law in Newbury,  
Vt., in 1800, removed to Newburyport, Mass., in 1807, and  
shortly after relinquished his profession and went into mercan-  
tile business. In 1810, he was elected a member of the Massa-  
chusetts Legislature, and from 1810 to 1819 was several times a  
member of the House, and several times a member of the Sen-  
ate. He was for thirty-three years a member, and for twenty  
years a deacon of the church in Newburyport, of which Dr.  
Spring was formerly pastor; and during most of these years  
either a teacher or superintendent of the Sabbath School.  
 
1 History of Churches and Ministers in Franklin County, by Rev. Theophilus  
Packard.  
 
A warm friend of Christian education, Mr. Banister was for  
many years a member of the School Committee and a Trustee  
of the Putnam Free School in Newburyport, a member of the  
Board of Trustees and of the Board of Visitors of the Theo-  
logical Seminary at Andover from 1827 till 1843, when he went  
out of office by age, and a Trustee of Amherst College from  
1830 to 1844. He was a wise counselor and efficient helper of  
the College in the period of its greatest pecuniary embarrass-  
ment. In 1839, he was a member of the Committee in whose  
name the circular was sent out which proved so effective, in con-  
nection with other agencies, in obtaining funds from the public  
of all the leading benevolent societies, and in his will made  
large bequests to such institutions. He died at Newburyport,  
July 1, 1853, aged seventy-nine. He married for his second  
wife a daughter of Moses Brown, one of the principal founders  
of Andover Seminary. His third wife, Miss Zilpah P. Grant,  
the distinguished Principal of the Seminary at Ipswich, still  
lives at the old family mansion in Newburyport.  
 
Rev. John Brown, D. D., was a Trustee from 1833 till his  
death in 1839, and during most of this period was a member of  
the Prudential Committee and one of the most active and use-  
ful members of .the Board. He was born in Brooklyn, Conn.,  
on the 4th of July, 1786, graduated at Dartmouth College in  
1809, studied theology the next two years at Andover Semi-  
nary then in its infancy, and was Tutor the next two years in  
the College where he was educated. On the 8th of December,  
1813, he was ordained and installed pastor of the Presbyterian  
Church in Cazenovia, where he labored with great fidelity and  
success about fifteen years. The degree of Doctor of Divinity  
was conferred on him by Union College in 1827. In 1829,  
he succeeded the Rev. Dr. Skinner in the pastorate of the Pine  
Street Church, Boston, but finding himself not at home and not  
adapted to a city charge, he accepted a call from the church in  
Hadley, where he was installed on the 2d of March, 1831, and  
 
his solid and enduring qualities as a minister and as a man,  
much beloved by those especially who knew him at home in the  
bosom of his beautiful and lovely family. After a ministry  
of eight years at Hadley, he died there of consumption, March  
22, 1839, aged fifty-three. The disease which terminated his  
own life had carried off a large number of brothers in their  
prime, and now, within a short period, it swept away almost his  
entire family of accomplished daughters. Eight at least of his  
family, including himself and wife, lie side by side in the Had-  
ley cemetery, and most of them died in the course of two or  
three years.  
 
Dr. Humphrey, who preached his funeral sermon and fur-  
nished a sketch of him for Sprague's Annals, says of him: " Dr.  
Brown was one of that class of ministers who had more talent  
and merit than some others of higher attractions and wider  
celebrity. He was one of those whom God has generally most  
highly honored by multiplying the seals of their ministry, and  
who will shine as the brightness of the firmament and as the  
stars forever."  
 
We can not review the history of Amherst College at this  
period without a feeling of sympathy and sorrow for those  
members, whether of the Corporation or of the Faculty, whose  
connection with the Institution came to a close while it was in  
a state of so much embarrassment and depression, just as we  
can not but sympathize with Moses in sacred history in that he  
came to the very borders of Canaan, but was not permitted to  
enter. Some of them had glimpses and visions of the land  
of promise. Dr. Humphrey never doubted that the College  
would see better days. Prof. Fiske prophesied not only the  
coming relief, but the source from which it was to come. His  
last words to his friend and colleague, President Hitchcock,  
were : " Amherst College will be relieved ; Mr. Williston will  
give it fifty thousand dollars, and you will put his name upon  
it." But even he came only to the borders, without being per-  
mitted to enter the promised land.  
 
