CHAPTER XV.  
 
THE RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF THIS PERIOD, 1836-45.  
 
IN his farewell address which is largely taken up with the  
religious history of the College, President Humphrey says :  
" About the last of March, 1827, the chapel was opened for  
public worship which has been regularly attended in term time  
on the Sabbath ever since. The sacrament of the Lord's sup-  
per has also been steadily administered once in two months.  
Soon after we became a separate congregation the following ar-  
rangement was made for the supply of the pulpit. It was agreed  
that the pastor should preach half of the time, and that the al-  
ternate Sabbaths should be taken by the Professors, all of whom  
were then preachers, in turn. It is now eighteen years since  
this plan was adopted, and there has been no change. The  
Professors, during all this time, have, with a single exception,  
been preachers as well as scientific and literary instructors.  
They have, I am happy to say, cheerfully fallen into the ar-  
rangement, which I consider a very desirable one, both as it re-  
spects themselves and their influence upon the College. Two  
sermons on the Sabbath were all that the Trustees required ;  
but as the Faculty Avere soon convinced that the religious inter-  
ests of the College demanded something more, they established  
a weekly lecture, which has been about as regularly kept up on  
Thursday evening as the public exercises on the Sabbath. For  
several years I preached every alternate Thursday evening. But  
as this, added to my other labors, was too much for my health,  
my brethren of the Faculty very kindly came in and relieved me  
by taking their turns in regular rotation. The Faculty them-  
 
have made it their practice to retire immediately to one of their  
rooms and spend an hour together in prayer and consultation  
upon the religious state and interests of the College. The classes  
have also been assigned by agreement to different members of  
the Faculty who have been charged with the duty of exercising  
^a sort of pastoral care over their respective divisions. The  
monthly concert of prayer for the conversion of the world is  
regularly attended, and professors of religion are often called  
together for exhortation and prayer."  
 
In answer to the question, what has been the success of these  
endeavors ? the President says : " The whole number of gradu-  
ates is seven hundred and sixty-five, a much larger number  
than the triennial catalogue of any other New England College  
shows within the first quarter of a century. The whole num-  
ber of beneficiaries who have been aided from the Charity  
Fund up to this time including those who from sickness and  
other causes, have not graduated, is five hundred and one. The  
amount of interest paid into the College treasury by the com-  
missioner of this fund is thirty-nine thousand eight hundred and  
ninety-six dollars and sixty-one cents.  
 
" Amherst College has been blessed with seven special reviv-  
als of religion. The first of these times of refreshing from the  
presence of the Lord, began in February, 1823, and continued  
nearly up to the time of Dr. Moore's death. The second re-  
vival took place in the spring of 1827. the third about the mid-  
dle of spring term in 1828, the fourth in the spring of 1831, the  
fifth in the months of March and April, 1835, the sixth in the  
spring term of 1839, the seventh and last in the summer of  
1842. By comparing these dates it will be seen that no class  
has ever yet graduated without passing through at least one  
season of spiritual refreshing. All these revivals might be called  
general, as they changed the whole face of things throughout  
the College, though some were more powerful than others-  
Never can any of these be forgotten by those who witnessed  
them. Many devoted servants of Christ who are now preach-  
ing the gospel, scattered over this broad land and upon foreign  
shores will, I doubt not, look back from a happy eternity to this  
Institution as their spiritual birthplace."  
18  
 
In the spring of 1837-8, one of those revivals in the church  
occurred which have been even more frequent than what Dr.  
Humphrey calls " general revivals," and which have sometimes  
been quite as efficacious in renewing the joy and the strength of  
Christians, and increasing their subsequent usefulness. Of this  
season, one who was then a member of the Senior class l writes :  
" I remember it well, and must say that rarely have I known a  
time when I felt as if heaven came so near to my soul. God be  
praised for that season ! I have not the statistics, but I carry  
the impressions, and hope never to lose them until they give  
place to the raptures of a brighter day." The following account  
eleven of the one hundred and eighty students on the cata-  
logue were professors of religion. The concert of prayer on  
the last Thursday of February was a solemn day, especially  
in the church. We met and spent an hour and a half in  
prayer and exhortation in the forenoon, and in the afternoon  
had a very impressive sermon upon the worth of the soul,  
from the Rev. J. Mitchell of Northampton. After that the  
interest seemed rather to decline than increase for two or  
three weeks. At length two individuals very unexpectedly  
came out on the same day and expressed their solemn deter-  
mination as well to their careless companions as to their Chris-  
tian classmates not to neglect their souls any longer. This pro-  
duced a general and powerful sensation throughout College.  
Our meetings began to be crowded, and within one week eleven  
or twelve were found to be indulging some hope that they had  
' passed from death unto life.' This was the first week in April,  
after which the work advanced, though not so rapidly, till the  
end of the term. The whole number of hopeful conversions is  
twenty, or, perhaps, a little over just about one-fourth part of  
all who were living ' without hope and without God ' when the  
revival began.  
 
" This is the fifth revival which has been enjoyed here since  
the winter of 1829. Its blessings to the hundred young men  
 
who are looking forward to the ministry are incalculable. Dur-  
ing the progress of the work, the pious students have devoted  
as much of several days as their studies would permit to private  
fasting and prayer. Not a single recitation has been omitted.  
Besides the regular ministrations of the Sabbath, we have had  
'preaching three evenings in a week."  
 
The following entry appears in the church records for August  
25, 1839: " Received J. H. Bancroft, Joseph A. Rosseel, James  
D. Trask, David R. Arnell, Daniel T. Fiske and Francis J.  
Morse by profession. These were part of the fruits of an inter-  
esting although not very general revival in College at the close  
of the last spring term." The first name in this list is that of  
a young man whose superior talents and scholarship united with  
rare personal and social qualities and remarkable refinement,  
made him a great favorite in the class (1839) and the College.  
The writer will never forget the thrill with which he heard one  
evening that this young man and another member of the Senior  
class were " sitting at the feet of Jesus." This was the begin-  
ning of the revival, and the antecedent if not the instrumental  
cause of a score of other conversions. And when he was cut  
off by an early death just as he was beginning to preach the  
gospel with rare promise of great usefulness, his friends could  
not but rejoice the more heartily that his example in College  
had won so many to Christ. A College friend l writes : "Of  
the Senior class at that time, Bancroft especially seemed to me  
to receive the kingdom of God like a little child. I shall never  
forget how he wept on the bosom of a seatmate at evening  
prayers, nor how his countenance soon brightened like sunshine  
after rain."  
 
This unusual religious interest was followed, as usual, by an  
increase of interest in the cause of missions, which was also  
promoted by the ordination of Mr. H. J. Van Lennep of the  
Class of '37 as an evangelist and missionary at Amherst soon  
after. The council was called by the College church. The or-  
dination took place on the day before Commencement (August  
27, 1839). The sermon was delivered by Rev. Dr. Hawes of  
Hartford, and the charge by Rev. Thatcher Thayer then of  
 
1 Rev. C. G. Goddard, Class of '41.  
 
South Dennis ; and " the exercises were highly interesting to a  
large assembly." 1  
 
The following communication from an alumnus, 2 contains  
some facts in the history of missionary organizations in Am-  
herst College, which were new to the writer of these pages and  
may be curious and perhaps instructive to the reader. " I have  
authentic information in regard to a secret missionary society,  
organized the 14th of July, 1828, and holding its last meeting,  
without any design as to the coincidence, the 14th of July, 1841,  
just thirteen years from its organization. William Arms and  
Elias Riggs were the committee who drafted the constitution.  
Justin Perkins was the first President, and Elias Riggs the first  
Secretary. It took the name of * Friends.' Its object was to  
excite and perpetuate a missionary spirit in the hearts of its  
members and their associates, and to become acquainted with  
the wants of the world and their duty personally in reference  
to those wants. Its meetings held privately, were sometimes  
Saturday night, sometimes Sabbath morning immediately after  
prayers, and sometimes Sabbath evening one hour before prayers.  
Some correspondence was had with similar societies in other in-  
stitutions and with missionaries, in the field. A concert of prayer  
was agreed upon by its members in connection with other asso-  
kins, Elias Riggs, William Arms, James L Merrick, Benjamin  
Schneider, Oliver P. Powers, Henry Lyman, Benjamin W. Par-  
ker, Ebenezer Burgess, Leander Thompson, George B. Rowell,  
Henry J. Van Lennep, William Walker, Samuel A. Taylor, Ed-  
win E. Bliss, Joel S. Everett, James G. Bridgeman. All of these  
names are now familiar in the annals of missions.  
 
"After an existence of thirteen years the organization of  
4 Friends ' ceased to exist, because of doubts as to the propriety  
of an early decision and a pledge to be a missionary. During  
the thirteen years of its existence, the names of twenty-nine  
graduates are marked as foreign missionaries on the triennial,  
 
and but seventeen of these were members of the Society, and  
these seventeen are the only persons out of ninety members  
who carried out into action the resolution formed in the ardor  
of youth and under the impulse of zealous young associates.  
One of the pillars of the Society having thus failed, the whole  
^superstructure fell with it."  
 
- " The Missionary Band," so called, was organized a few years  
later, and continues to the present time. It has done good in  
the way of exciting an intelligent interest in the cause of mis-  
sions, and has doubtless been the means of making some good  
missionaries. But facts similar to' those mentioned above have  
raised in many minds the same question as to the duty and expe-  
diency of a decision in College. " There was a society in Col-  
lege," writes Rev. George Washburn of the Class of '55, "called  
the Missionary Band, I think, made up of those who had de-  
termined to go out as foreign missionaries. I was again and  
again urged to join it, but refused on the ground that the time  
had not come when I could fairly decide the question of my field  
of labor. I think there were five members of my class in this  
Missionary Band. Not one of them became a foreign mission-  
ary. I am the only representative of my class abroad. 1 So far  
the result certainly seems to prove the truth of my conclusion."  
 
The general revivals in Amherst College have all occurred in  
the spring term, with the single exception of that of 1842, which  
occurred in the summer term, the season of the year which, for  
obvious reasons, is the most unfavorable to religious interest in  
College.  
 
Under date of November 6, 1842, the church records contain  
the following entry : " The Lord's Supper celebrated. Richard  
S. S. Dickinson was received by letter ; and Lucius M. Boltwood,  
Zephaniah M. Humphrey, Thaddeus Wilson, Edward W. Osgood,  
George H. Newhall, Charles Temple, Josiah Tyler, Ann Eliza-  
beth Vaill, Mary Hitchcock, Catherine Hitchcock, Emily E.  
Fowler and Mary Humphrey, by profession : most of these be-  
ing the fruits of a deeply interesting revival with which it  
pleased God to visit the College during the last summer."  
 
1 Mr. Washburn went out as a missionary of the A. B. C. F. M., though he is now  
 
The following recollections of this event will be read with in-  
terest: "It was a season of marked power in the hold it gained  
upon the whole body of students. It resulted in the apparent  
conversion of many hard subjects. But none of these endured,  
and the only fruits of the work which proved abiding, were  
among the children of pious parents." l  
 
" It was in the summer of '42, I think, that a great revival  
occurred in College, where many of the ' hardest cases ' were  
converted, some of them relapsing in the vacation that immedi-  
ately followed. I well recollect a hardened blasphemer so  
changed as to read the penitential Psalms with tears, confessing  
that he never before knew the joy of sorrow, of humility and  
self-denial." '  
 
" The interest in religion, always lively at Amherst, culmi-  
nated every few years in a revival. We had one our Freshman  
year, the great event of that year, and of life to many. It  
brought out new powers in our preachers and in our associates.  
Newhall was the most deeply affected of any of us by this mode  
of religious fervor. It lasted through his life. He always after-  
wards talked straight at every one about his soul, and was not  
to be put off. He could not spare time to eat. He was one of  
our most elegant scholars in languages, no mathematician, a co-  
pious and graceful writer and pleader. He kept a journal and  
wrote many letters. After he graduated, he made a revival  
less marked than in those who were converted. And the genu-  
ineness and thoroughness of this change have been attested in  
not a few instances by their greater Christian activity and use-  
fulness not only in College but in their subsequent lives.  
 
Dr. Humphrey was as usual in the liveliest sympathy with  
this revival. Indeed he seemed to have renewed his youth, as  
he saw one after another of his beloved pupils beginning a new  
spiritual life, and he labored and prayed, exhorted and preached  
 
in season and out of season as if he foresaw and felt that it  
might be his last opportunity of engaging in such labors of love  
and joy in College. I shall never forget how as we drew near  
the 4th of July and feared that it might interrupt and possibly  
terminate the good work, he invited all who wanted to meet  
him in the " Rhetorical Room," (then our "small chapel ") for a  
,, religious" service before morning prayers, which then, at that  
season of the year, were at five o'clock, and then and there he  
preached the way of life and salvation to us,  
 
" as never sure to preach again,  
And as a dying man to dying men."  
 
