CHAPTER XI. 
 
THE PERIOD OF RAPID GROWTH, 1825-36.  
 
THE year which began in September, 1825, was the first en-  
tire collegiate year of Amherst College. With this year our  
History enters on a new epoch. The new organization of the  
Faculty dates from this time, since not only the new officers  
now commenced the duties of their office, but those who had  
been members of the Faculty before had hitherto served the  
College for their old salaries and in their old departments. The  
Faculty at this time was constituted as follows: Rev. Heman  
Humphrey, D. D., President, Professor of Mental and Moral  
Philosophy and Professor of Divinity; Rev. Edward Hitchcock,  
A. M., Professor of Chemistry and Natural History ; Rev. Jonas  
King, A. M., Professor of Oriental Literature ; Rev. Nathan W.  
Fiske, A. M., Professor of the Greek Language and Literature,  
and Professor of Belles-Lettres ; Rev. Solomon Peck, A. M.,  
Professor of the Hebrew and Latin Languages and Literature ;  
Samuel M. Worcester, A. M., Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory ;  
Jacob Abbott, A. M., Professor of Mathematics and Natural  
Philosophy ; Ebenezer S. Snell, A. M., Tutor of Mathematics. 1  
The first catalogue which bears the names of this Faculty, was  
printed in October, 1825, by Carter & Adams names now as  
familiar to almost all the graduates of Amherst College as any  
 
1 This is the Faculty as constituted at the first annual meeting of the Trustees.  
It appears from the records that at the meeting for organization in April previous,  
Rev. Jasper Adams was appointed Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy,  
and Mr. Jacob Abbott, Associate Professor of Mathematics and Professor of Chem-  
istry. Mr. Adams seems not to have accepted, and at the annual meeting Mr. Ab-  
bott was appointed in his place. At the same time a Professorship of Chemistry  
and Natural History and a Tutorship of Mathematics were established and filled by  
 
of the Presidents or Professors. They established the first press  
in the town in 1825, and the catalogues which had hitherto been  
printed abroad were henceforth printed in Amherst.  
 
On the catalogue for 1825, John Leland, Esq., appears as  
Treasurer, and Rufus Graves as Financier. In 1826 the consti-  
tution of the Charity Fund was so altered by the concurrent  
action of the Board of Trustees and the Board of Overseers in  
the manner provided for in Article 13, that the office of Finan-  
cier of that fund and that of Treasurer of the College, could  
be united in one person ; and from 1826 John Leland was both  
Treasurer and Financier till 1833, when Lucius Boltwood was  
appointed Financier and John Leland retained the office of  
Treasurer.  
 
Rev. Joshua Crosby was chosen Vice-President of the Corpo-  
ration at the same time that Dr. Humphrey was chosen Presi-  
dent, viz., at the first organization of the Board, and he contin-  
ued to hold that office till his decease in 1838. The office seems  
gradually to have gone into disuse, and Mr. Crosby was the last  
students increased, the next year, to one hundred and thirty-six ;  
in 1825 it rose to one hundred and fifty-two, and from that time  
it went on increasing pretty regularly, with a slight ebb in 1830  
and 1831, for a period of eleven years, till rising to its spring-  
tide in 1836, it reached an aggregate of two hundred and fifty-  
nine. For two years Amherst ranked above Harvard in the  
number of students, and was second only to Yale. Thus was  
the sentiment of the Committee of Investigation confirmed, that  
Institutions almost always flourish under persecution whether  
apparent or real, and gain new strength from opposition.  
 
If we inquire into the causes of this rapid and extraordinary  
growth of the College, the most obvious, and, for a time, the  
most powerful, was unquestionably the violent opposition which  
it encountered. This brought it into immediate notice in Massa-  
chusetts. This soon made it known and conspicuous through  
the whole country. This enlisted the sympathy and support  
not only of those who held the same religious faith, but of all  
 
who love fair play and hate even the appearance of persecu-  
tion. Local feeling, sectional jealousy, the envy of neighboring  
towns and of parishes in the same town, the interest of rival  
Institutions, sectarian zeal and party spirit, hostility to Ortho-  
doxy and hatred of evangelical religion, all united to oppose the  
founding, the incorporation and the endowment of the College ;  
and the result was only to multiply its friends, increase the num-  
ber of students, and swell the tide which bore it on to victory  
and prosperity.  
 
This period of rapid growth to the College was also the period  
when the reaction against Unitarianism was at its height, when  
zeal for Orthodoxy and evangelical piety was fresh and strong,  
when revivals of religion were bringing } 7 oung men in great  
numbers into the churches, Colleges and theological seminaries,  
when home and foreign missions were calling for an extraordi-  
nary increase in the number of ministers, and education societies  
were furnishing new facilities for the education of poor and pious  
young men for the ministry, and the recently established concert  
of prayer for Colleges was directing the attention of the churches  
in an unprecedented degree to these Institutions when, in short,  
evangelical Christians of all denominations, were awakened as  
they never had been before to prayer and effort for the salvation  
of lost men and the conversion of a perishing world. As the  
latest and fullest representative of this movement, Amherst Col-  
lege was borne on the hearts of ministers and Christians with  
extraordinary zeal and earnestness, and that more in proportion  
as they were more zealous and active in their sympathy with the  
cause which it represented.  
 
The College was still more deeply rooted in the sympathies  
and the confidence of the Christian community by reason of its  
marked religious character and positive religious influence. The  
President, Professors and Tutors, were all men of strong reli-  
gious faith, hope and zeal, experimental and real Christians, who  
felt, as Dr. Humphrey insisted in his inaugural, that education  
should have reference to two worlds, but chiefly to the future,  
and that moral education, spiritual training, Christian character  
 
were in full sympathy with their teachers in this view, and ready  
to co-operate heartily with them in securing this end. And the  
greater part of those students who entered without a personal  
hope in Christ, were converted in the frequent and powerful re-  
vivals of religion with which the College was blessed from the  
beginning, and which reached every class, sometimes almost  
every member of the class, with their salutary influence. Before  
the close of the period now under our riotice, missionaries edu-  
cated in Amherst, were laboring in most of the new States and  
Territories, and in every quarter of the globe, and one of these  
had fallen a martyr on the Island of Sumatra. Very many par-  
acknowledged, that the Charity Fund, by the ample pecuniary  
aid which it afforded to indigent and pious young men, drew a  
large number of students, and those of the very best sort, many  
of whom were alike distinguished for character and scholarship.  
 
The literary advantages, though of course inferior in many  
respects to those of the older and richer colleges, were not with-  
out their attractive features. In 1825, the library was small  
and far from select, and the apparatus for the illustration of  
the Sciences was still more rudimentary and imperfect. But  
through the zeal and enterprise of the Professors, they were  
constantly increasing, and thus becoming relatively large. And  
in 1831, Prof. Hovey purchased in London and Paris philo-  
sophical and chemical apparatus and books to the amount of  
eight thousand dollars, the books consisting mostly of standard  
works in the various departments of literature, those works  
which are most valuable and indispensable in a college library,  
and the apparatus for the illustration of the Physical Sciences  
and for accurate observations in Astronomy, being so superior  
to any that could then be found in other American colleges as  
to attract the visits of their Professors and the admiration of  
scientific men.  
 
The Professors were young, inexperienced and comparatively  
 
savans and scholars. And their very youth, with the enterprise  
and progressive spirit for which they were remarkable, was at-  
tractive to young men. It was among the arguments which  
drew the writer, who was then a young man, and several of his  
classmates and fellow-students from Hamilton College to Am-  
herst. In short, it must be admitted that " Young America,"  
so far as there was any in those comparatively staid and stable  
times, was drawn to Amherst, somewhat as it is now to Cornell  
University, although there was no lowering of the standard of  
admission and scholarship, still less any relaxation of moral re-  
straints and religious influences. It was regarded as pre-emi-  
nently the live College and the progressive Institution of New  
England. President Humphrey had now risen above the acci-  
dental unpopularity of his first years and reigned in the confi-  
dence and affections of all the students. Prof. Hitchcock was  
already known through the State which he had explored geo-  
logically to a great extent while a pastor in Conway, and  
whether in or out of College, he was known only to be loved.  
Prof. Fiske was not long in developing those characteristics and  
habits of mind which made him later so accurate a scholar, so  
acute a metaphysician and so distinguished a teacher. Prof.  
Peck was admired for his polished translation of the Latin clas-  
sics, and esteemed as a gentleman and a Christian. Prof. Wor-  
cester was a fluent speaker, a faithful critic and an interesting  
lecturer, especially on the history of English and American or-  
ators. Prof. Abbott made science easy, clear and attractive in  
the lecture room, as he afterwards did morals and religion in his  
books, and was quite popular till his thoughts and studies be-  
gan to be divided between teaching and writing for the people.  
Prof. Hovey, who succeeded -Prof. Abbott, was the best scholar  
in his class at Yale, and a man of broad and high culture. But  
ill-health prevented him from making his mark upon the Col-  
lege, and led to an early resignation. Tutor Snell was esteemed  
a good mathematician and an excellent teacher, although his ex-  
cessive modesty hindered a just appreciation of his worth, and  
 
tions of the College in the period under review, he is happy to  
corroborate by the following just and genial sketch furnished by  
a contemporary whose praise for learning and missionary service  
is in all the churches : l " Ours was the first class which en-  
tered after the College charter was granted. The Institution  
was pervaded by the principles and aims of its pious founders.  
I think a considerable majority of my class were hopefully pious  
when we entered, and others were led to Christ during our Col-  
lege course, so that at the close there were only four out of forty  
who were not hopefulty pious. I have never ceased to regard  
it as one of the kind and gracious dispensations of Providence  
towards me that at the early age of fifteen I was thrown among  
classmates and fellow-students who were so generally serious  
and earnest men.  
 
"One result of such men being gathered to pursue their  
studies there, was the entire absence of that abuse of new  
comers which has so often disgraced our Colleges. I do not  
remember that a single member of my class was insulted or  
maltreated during our first year.  
 
" I have not at hand a Triennial Catalogue, but a glance at  
one would show that a large proportion of my fellow-students  
were preparing for the gospel ministry. Bridgman, one of the  
first missionaries to China, was still a member of College when  
I entered. So were Boggs, Tucker and Hebard, and perhaps  
others. Also of those who have been highly useful laborers in  
the ministry in our own land, R. E. Pattison, Artemas and Asa  
Bullard, Edward P. Humphrey, and others. Of my own class,  
Bliss, Lyman, Parker, Perkins and myself, have been permitted  
to engage in the foreign missionary service, and all but Lyman,  
(whose untimely death, perhaps, did as much for the cause as  
would a long and active life,) are still, I believe, in active ser-  
vice. Of the class which next succeeded us, five engaged in  
missionary service, two of whom are still among our esteemed  
fellow-laborers in Turkey, B. Schneider and P. O. Powers.  
 
" Dr. Humphrey, our President, was a plain man, very practi-  
 
my contemporaries. So bad all our teachers, Hitchcock, Fiske,  
Peck, Worcester, Abbott, Edwards and Snell.  
 
" We had several Greeks pursuing their studies there in our  
time. One of them, my classmate, Petrokokino, was for several  
years a translator for our mission. Karavelles taught for a  
time in one of our schools, and was subsequently a judge in  
Athens. Paspati is one of the best physicians now practicing  
translation of the Scriptures. While in Greece, I had the priv-  
ilege of aiding for a short season in the Modern-Greek transla-  
tion. While at Smyrna, I prepared and edited, with aid from  
competent Armenians, the entire Bible in their language, and I  
am now permitted to do the same for the Bulgarians in their  
language, which is a dialect of the Slavic."  
 
The Tutors of this period doubtless contributed their full  
share towards the popularity and growth of the Institution for  
many of them were men of rare talents and attainments, and  
not a 'few of them have risen to eminence in subsequent life.  
After Ebenezer S. Snell and Bela B. Edwards, whose names  
have already been mentioned, came in order Joseph S. Clark,  
William P. Paine, Story Hebard, Ezekiel Russell, H. B. Hack-  
ett, Justin Perkins, W. S. Tyler, Timothy Dwight, Edward P.  
Humphrey, Ebenezer Burgess, Elbridge Bradbury, Thatcher  
Thayer, W. H. Tyler, Charles Clapp, S. B. Ingram, Calvin E.  
Park, Amos Bullard, George C. Partridge and Charles B. Ad-  
ams. Of these twenty-one tutors, seventeen became ordained  
ministers, nine doctors of divinity, three doctors of law, three  
professors in college, three professors in theological seminaries,  
 
1 Paspati has contributed to philology some valuable papers on the language of  
the Gypsies. Karavelles and another Greek, educated at Mount Pleasant, were the  
first to greet the writer of this History on his landing at the Island of Syra, where  
the former now has charge of the telegraphic office. Some of these Greeks were  
aided in obtaining their education by Arthur Tappan, under the influence of Dr.  
King. " On one of our visits to Northampton," says his daughter, " father took  
grandfather, mother and myself in his carriage to Amherst College, to call on Pres-  
ident Humphrey. During the call, Dr. Humphrey sent for a number of Greek stu-  
 
four foreign missionaries, one secretary of the Massachusetts  
Home Missionary Society, and one the founder of one of the  
leading female seminaries of New England. Several of them  
are well-known as editors and authors of books in literature,  
science or theology. Three of them have been honored, faith-  
ful and useful Trustees of Amherst College.  
 
Eleven of the twenty-one are still living. They are all either  
teachers or preachers, and as equally divided as an odd number  
can be, between the two professions all respected and beloved  
by pupils and people now as when they were Tutors, and some  
occupying high places of honor and influence.  
 
Of the ten who have finished their course, Bela B. Edwards  
had left the tutorship before I entered College. But the savor  
of his learning and piety still lingered in the Institution ; offi-  
cers and students still spoke of him with affection, almost with  
veneration. Joseph S. Clark was Tutor when I was a Junior in  
College. Of course I never met him in the recitation room, but  
I have a fresh and pleasant recollection of his constant attend-  
ance at the Sabbath morning prayer-meetings of the students,  
of the uniform fervor of his piety, and the attractiveness of his  
consistent, steadfast Christian life.  
 
Story Hebard was teaching French and Latin in College  
while I was teaching Mathematics and English branches in Am-  
herst Academy. Then we went to Andover together, riding  
in the same stage-coach, and roomed together on the lower floor  
of Bartlett Hall, till I returned to a tutorship in Amherst, and  
he went on with his theological studies. Respected as a Tutor,  
beloved by classmates and friends, he was dear to me as a brother.  
Never was there a more unselfish person, rarely a more faultless  
character or a more blameless life. Almost literally he never  
said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own ;  
if ever man did, he loved his neighbor as himself. His spirit  
was too gentle and good for earth ; his body was too frail and  
delicate for the hardships of missionary life. He died in 1841,  
at the age of thirty-nine, in the Turkish Mission.  
 
Justin Perkins, Ebenezer Burgess and Timothy Dwight'Were  
my fellow-tutors and fellow-boarders at Prof. Hitchcock's, whose  
 
all the Tutors. There we discussed literature, science and re-  
ligion with each other and the Professor. There, at one time,  
we canvassed principles, plans and methods of education with  
Miss Lyon when she was laying the foundations of Mount  
Holyoke Seminary. There, at another, we sat at the feet of  
Dr. Eli Smith as he discoursed of the Holy Land and the Turk-  
ish Mission. Perkins taught Rhetoric, Logic and Languages  
with indefatigable industry, exemplary faithfulness and perfect  
propriety ; already we could see in him (such was the gravity  
of his deportment, such the maturity and balance of his judg-  
ment,) the founder and father of the mission among the Nesto-  
rians, and (such was his linguistic lore) the future translator of  
the Scriptures into modern Syriac. Burgess came after him, but  
was almost totally unlike him. An inquirer into all that was  
new and a worshiper of all that was true, eagerly seeking for  
discoveries in the material and the spiritual universe, and fully  
believing that there were more things in heaven and earth than  
any existing science or philosophy ever dreamed of, he knew  
well how to awaken thought and inquiry in the minds of his pu-  
pils, but he was not master of the art of expression or commu-  
nication. We could hardly expect that such a man would spend  
all his days in the missionary field the seeds of the " Lowell  
Lectures " and the " Antiquity of Man " were already planted  
in him, and they could not fail to germinate. D wight, with a  
marvelous gift of expression, had also a genius for Mathematics,  
and laid the students and teachers of that day under everlasting  
obligations by his simplification and abbreviation of those end-  
less algebraic formulas in Button's Conic Sections. He too had  
devoted himself to the work of missions; but he died within  
two or three years after the expiration of his tutorship, with-  
out setting foot on missionary ground. Perkins and Burgess  
both died in 1869. I had fondly hoped to enjoy much more of  
their society. It would have been a melancholy satisfaction at  
least to have seen them in their last hours and followed them to  
their graves. But I was then a traveler in foreign lands ; " auget  
maestitiam quod satiari vultu, complexu non contigit ; pauciori-  
bus lacrimis compositus es, et novissima in luce desideravere  
aliquid oculi tui."  
 
"W. H. Tyler, Charles Clapp and S. B. Ingram filled up the  
interval between my tutorship and my professorship. Of the  
first, a brother may be pardoned for recording the verdict of all  
who ever enjoyed his instructions, that he was for two years in  
Amherst College what he was for eleven years in the Institution  
founded by him in Pittsfield, " a model teacher." The second  
left behind him in College the reputation of a fine scholar (he  
was the valedictorian of the Class of '32,) and the third, of a  
thoughtful, truthful man, and an earnest Christian.  
 
On my return as a permanent oflBcer in 1836, Prof. Snell's  
house succeeded to Prof. Hitchcock's as the home of the Tutors  
and the bachelor Professor. A rare group of choice and con-  
genial spirits it was that gathered around that table, and, having  
satisfied their bodily wants, remained almost daily after dinner  
or supper for " the feast of reason and the flow of soul." Two  
Professors and three Tutors, as unlike in our tastes as we were  
in the branches which we taught, we ate and drank, we talked  
and read, we disputed and bantered and laughed and sung ; and  
thin and sober as some of us naturally were, we all grew hale  
and hearty in the process. Of that charming "symposium,"  
whether reason or humor, science or song ruled the hour, were  
we asked to name him who was the center and the soul, before  
all others, scarcely excepting our 'genial host himself, with one  
consent we should speak the name of Amos Bullard. The ripest  
scholar, the rarest thinker, the keenest wit and the sincerest  
Christian of the whole circle ! And is it for this reason that he  
is the only one of the five whom the Heavenly Father has taken  
to himself? " The good die first." He died in 1850, at the age  
B. Condit and Edwards A. Park became Professors, both of  
whom are now widely known and highly honored Professors in  
theological seminaries. The former was connected with the  
College only three years, and the latter rendered the service of  
only one year and one term. At the resignation of Prof. Park,  
in 1836, Prof. Fiske was transferred from the Latin and Greek  
 
Tyler was chosen Professor of the Latin, Greek and Hebrew  
Languages and Literature.  
 
The number of students was increased for a year or two by  
the introduction of a new course of study running parallel to  
the old. "At the annual meeting of the Board of Trustees,  
August 21, 1826, the Faculty presented a detailed report of the  
state of the Seminary and the course of instruction, together  
with some general remarks upon the inadequacy of the prevail-  
ing systems of classical education in this country to meet the  
wants and demands of an enlightened public. The Trustees  
were so much interested in this report, particularly that part  
which touches upon the subject of modifications and improve-  
ments, that they appointed a committee consisting of the Presi-  
dent, the Hon. Lewis Strong and the Hon. Samuel Howe, to  
publish extracts from it at such time and in such a way as they  
might think best calculated to elicit inquiry, to subserve the  
great interests of the College, and to promote the general cause  
of education. At the same meeting the Trustees passed a re-  
solve, requesting the Faculty to draw up a specific plan of im-  
for this express purpose, the* Faculty reported their " specific  
plan " and after much discussion and some amendment the re-  
port was ordered to be printed, and was unanimously adopted  
by the Board so far forth as " to express their cordial approba-  
tion of the general plan, and their design of incorporating the  
new course substantially, as drawn out by the Faculty with the  
existing four years' system."  
 
This " parallel or equivalent course " as recommended by the  
Faculty in their second report was to differ from the old 1, In  
the prominence which will be given to English literature. 2, In  
the substitution of the modern for the ancient languages, par-  
ticularly the French and Spanish, and should room be found  
hereafter, German or Italian, or both, with particular attention  
to the literature in these rich and popular languages. 3, In Me-  
 
Chemistry and other kindred branches of Physical Science, by  
showing their application' to the more useful arts and trades, to  
the cultivation of the soil, and to domestic economy. 5, In a  
course of familiar lectures upon curious and labor-saving ma-  
chines, upon bridges, locks and aqueducts, and upon the differ-  
ent orders of Architecture with models for illustration. 6, In  
Natural History, by devoting more time to those branches which  
are now taught, and introducing others into the course. 7, In  
Modern History, especially the history of the Puritans, in con-  
nection with the civil and ecclesiastical history of our own coun-  
try. 8, In the elements of Civil and Political Law, embracing  
Mathematics, Natural, Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, Anat-  
omy, Political Economy and Theology, according to the plan,  
were to be common to both courses. The requirements for ad-  
mission were also to be the same for both courses, not excepting  
the present amount of Latin and Greek. And the Faculty stren-  
uously insisted that the new course should be fully " equivalent "  
to the old, that it should fill up as many years, should be carried  
on by as able instructors, should take as wide and elevated a  
range, should require as great an amount of hard study or mental  
discipline, and should be rewarded by the same academic honors.  
 
Besides the new parallel or equivalent course, the Faculty  
earnestly recommend a new department for systematic instruc-  
tion in the science of education, and they further suggest a de-  
partment of theoretical and practical mechanics.  
 
While the Trustees unanimously approve of the general plan,  
and declare their purpose to incorporate the new course with  
the old system, they also express their intention "to add the  
department of education as soon as they can obtain the neces-  
sary means. The mechanic department they deem of less imme-  
 
Not long after the meeting of the Board in December, 1826,  
the Faculty drew up a plan of the studies, arranged in parallel  
columns wherever the two courses differed, and published it, to-  
gether with other matter usually contained in the annual cata-  
logue, under the title, " Outline' of the System of Instruction  
recently adopted in the College at Amherst, Mass., 1827." In  
this paper, they say : " In consequence of the demand which  
is at the present time made by a large portion of the public  
for the means of an elevated and liberal education without the  
necessity of devoting so much time to the study of the Ancient  
Languages, the Trustees have authorized the establishment of  
two parallel courses of study, in one of which Ancient, and in  
the other, Modern Languages and Literature receive particular  
attention. In other respects, the courses coincide, correspond-  
ing with the system generally adopted in the colleges of New  
England. In studies in which they coincide, both divisions will  
receive instruction in company, and they will graduate together  
at the termination of the four years' course. This system is ex-  
pected to go into operation at the commencement of the ensu-  
ing collegiate year." 1  
 
At the commencement of the ensuing year, (1827-8) the  
whole number of students rose from one hundred and seveniy 2  
to two hundred and nine, and the Freshman class, which the  
previous year contained fifty-one, now numbered sixty-seven, of  
whom eighteen are set down on the catalogue as students " in  
Modern Languages." So far forth the experiment promised well.  
In regard to the number of students, it was at least a fair begin-  
ning. But now commenced the difficulties in the execution of  
the plan. These were found to be far greater than the Trustees  
or the Faculty had anticipated. The teacher of Modern Lan-  
guages, a native of France, was not very successful in teaching,  
and was quite incapable of maintaining order in his class, so  
that the Faculty were compelled to appoint one of the Profess-  
ors to preside at his recitations. The Professors and Tutors on  
 
1 1 find in the records of the Faculty at this time, [1827-8] a plan for a fifth year  
of study to be added to the curriculum. It never appears to have gone beyond the  
 
whom it devolved to give the additional instruction, although  
willing, as they declared in their report, " to take upon them-  
selves additional burdens," had their hands full already with  
other duties, and found unexpected difficulties in organizing and  
conducting the new course of studios. The College was not  
sufficiently manned for the work it had undertaken, and was too  
poor to furnish an adequate Faculty. Truth also probably re-  
quires the statement that the new course, which was the favorite  
scheme of one of the Professors, was never very heartily adopted  
by the rest of the Faculty who, therefore, worked in and for it  
with far less courage and enthusiasm than they did in the studies  
of the old curriculum. Moreover they discovered as the year  
advanced, that the new plan was not received by the public  
with so much favor as had been expected, that they had proba-  
bly overestimated the popular demand for the Modern Lan-  
guages and the Physical Sciences in collegiate education. The  
students of the new course were not slow to perceive all these  
facts. They soon discovered the fact, whatever might be the  
cause, that they were not obtaining an education which was in  
reality equivalent to that obtained by other students.  
 
The next year, 1828, the Freshman class fell back to fifty-  
two, just about the number of two years before ; and of these  
so few wished, or particularly cared to join the new course,  
that there was no division organized in the Modern Languages.  
Those who had entered the previous year, gradually fell back  
into the regular course. The catalogue for the 3 r ear 1828-9,  
retains no trace of the new plan, except the parallel columns,  
of the old and new courses of studies. At their annual meet-  
ing in 1829, the Trustees voted to dispense with the parallel  
course in admitting students hereafter, and made French one of  
the regular studies. At the same meeting, the Professor who  
was the father of the scheme, resigned his professorship. Thus  
not a vestige of the experiment remained, except that the class  
with which it was introduced, graduated in 1831 the largest  
class (with one exception) that has ever left the Institution.  
Thus ended the first attempt to introduce the Modern Languages  
and the Physical Sciences as an equivalent for the time-honored  
 
as it was presented in the reports of the Faculty, was exceed-  
ingly attractive and promising, quite as much so as any of the  
numerous similar schemes by which it has been succeeded, and  
it was recommended by quite as convincing and indeed, to a great  
extent, the very same arguments. It is no discredit to the men  
who devised it, and, under such unfavorable circumstances, ex-  
ecuted it to the best of their ability. Essentially the same ex-  
periment, intensified by the omission of the Mathematics as well  
as the Ancient Classics, is now being tried in older and younger,  
and far richer institutions, with men and means in abundance,  
with what result, time must determine.  
 
With so large a number of students, and that number con-  
stantly and rapidly increasing, the officers of the College soon  
found the place too strait for them, and began very naturally to  
look about for more ample accommodations. The most imme-  
diate and pressing want was felt to be that of a more convenient  
and suitable place of worship. " When I entered upon my office,  
in 1823," says President Humphrey, " the students worshiped on  
the Sabbath in the old parish meeting-house on the hill. I soon  
found that the young men of the society felt themselves crowded  
by the students, and there were increasing symptoms from Sab-  
bath to Sabbath qf collision and disturbance. I accordingly told  
the Trustees that I thought it would be safest and best for us to  
withdraw and worship by ourselves in one of the College build-  
ings till a chapel could be built for permanent occupancy. They  
torical Sketches proceeds to urge in favor of a separate congre-  
gation and place of worship for students, is the greater appro-  
priateness, directness and impressiveness of the preaching which  
can thus be addressed to them. On this subject there has been  
and is, so far as I know, but one opinion in the Faculty of Am-  
herst College. The experience of half a century has only con-  
firmed and established the views expressed by Dr. Humphrey,  
that it is a great loss of moral power to preach to students scat-  
tered among a large mixed congregation.  
 
But the old chapel, laboratory and lecture room, and room  
for every other 1 use, in the upper story of North College, could  
not long accommodate the growing number of students, even  
for morning and evening prayers, still less the congregation for  
Sabbath worship. The subject of a new chapel came before the  
Board of Trustees at their first meeting under the charter.  
They were encouraged to consider the subject and form some  
plans in respect to it, by a legacy of some four thousand dollars  
or more which Adam Johnson of Pelham had left to the College  
for the express purpose of erecting such a building. But his  
will had been disallowed -by the Judge of Probate, and an ap-  
peal from his decision was now pending in the Supreme Court.  
At this time, therefore, they only voted, that in case the will  
should be established, the Prudential Committee be instructed to  
proceed with all convenient despatch in the erection of a chapel  
building. They furthermore authorized that committee to bor-  
row any further sum of money which they might deem requisite  
for that purpose, not exceeding six thousand dollars. " At the  
annual meeting in August, 1825, the call for a chapel and other  
public accommodations had become too urgent to be postponed  
without sacrificing the interests of the College. In this emer-  
gency, the Trustees could not hesitate. They saw but one  
course, and they promptly empowered the Prudential Com-  
mittee to contract for the erection of a chapel building," 1 and  
also a third College edifice, if they deemed it expedient ; at the  
same time authorizing them to borrow such sums of money, as  
of 1826, and so far completed in the course of the season that  
on the 28th of February, 1827, it was dedicated. Dr. Humphrey  
preached the dedication sermon. His text was : " Hitherto hath  
the Lord helped us." " Five years ago," he says, " there was  
one building for the accommodation of between fifty and sixty  
students ; four years ago there were between ninety and a hun-  
 
two years since the Seminary was chartered, and yet I believe  
that in the number of under-graduates it now holds the third or  
fourth rank in the long list of American Colleges ! God forbid  
that this statement should excite any but grateful emotions. It  
is meet that we should carefully look over this ground to-da} r ,  
that the inscription may be indelibly engraved on our hearts  
' Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.' ' Meanwhile the decision  
of the Judge of Probate had been reversed, and the will of  
Adam Johnson l established by the Supreme Court.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Board in August, 1828, it was  
voted that in testimony of their grateful remembrance of his mu-  
nificent donation, the apartment occupied as a chapel should for-  
ever be called Johnson Chapel, and that the President be re-  
quested to have the words, " Johnson Chapel," inserted in large  
arid distinct characters over the middle door or principal en-  
trance of the apartment. This inscription placed over the door  
of the chapel proper, in 1829, disappeared after a time, being car-  
ried off by students in some of their pranks, and was replaced at  
the instance of the writer shortly before the semi-centennial. It  
now stands over the arch near the foot of the stairs in the lower  
hall. In 1846 a suitable monument was erected over the grave  
of Mr. Johnson by direction of the Trustees and at the expense  
of the College.  
 
Besides the chapel proper, which has ever since been used for  
morning and evening prayers, as well as for the worship of the  
Sabbath, the chapel building contained originally four recitation  
rooms, a room for philosophical apparatus, and a cabinet for  
islature. And I have before me a pamphlet written in the same spirit by a brother  
of the testator, entitled, " The Last Will and Testament of Thomas Johnson, of  
Greenfield, County of Franklin, in favor of the Trustees of Amherst College," in  
which he (the brother) bequeathes to the said Trustees nothing but woes and male-  
dictions. It must be admitted that Adam Johnson was not such a man as would  
have been likely to be among the founders of Amherst College. The desire of a  
childless old man to perpetuate his name seems to have been his chief inducement  
to make the bequest, and his motive was doubtless skillfully pressed by Col. Graves  
and Esq. Dickinson. But the verdict of the Supreme Court exculpates them from  
 
basement. These recitation rooms were named after the depart-  
ments to which they were appropriated, for example, the Greek,  
Latin, Mathematical and Tablet rooms l on the first floor, and  
the Rhetorical and Theological rooms on the second, and they  
were far in advance of the recitation rooms of the older col-  
leges in size, beauty, and convenience. The College library  
was soon removed from the fourth story of North College to  
the room intended for it in the third story of the chapel, and  
the room not being half filled by it, the remaining half, viz.,  
the shelves on either side of the door, were for some time set  
apart respectively for the libraries of the Alexandrian and  
Athenian societies. When better accommodations were fur-  
nished many years later for the Mineral Cabinet, the recitation  
rooms of Prof. Mather and Prof. Seelye took the place of the  
Tablet room, the old Cabinet, and a part of the adjoining entry,  
and the Rhetorical and Theological rooms gave place to the  
small chapel. And when Williston Hall provided ample apart-  
ments for the Chemical department, the old Laboratory, so long  
the scene of Prof. Hitchcock's brilliant experiments and corus-  
cations of genius, was given up to storage and other necessary  
but comparatively ignoble uses.  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees in August, 1827, it was  
voted that the Prudential Committee be directed to take imme-  
diate measures for erecting another College building for the ac-  
commodation of the students, similar to those already erected,  
and cause the same to be completed as soon as may be, provided  
that in their judgment a suitable site for such building can be  
obtained.  
 
The site was soon selected, and before the commencement of  
another collegiate year, the building was completed so as to be  
occupied by students for the year 1828-9. This new dormitory  
was better adapted to promote the health, comfort and conven-  
ience of students, especially in its well-lighted and ventilated  
bed-rooms, and its ample closets, than either of the older build-  
ings, and was perhaps a better dormitory, as being built on a  
better plan, than any that then existed in any other college. It  
had, however, the disadvantage of running east and west, in-  
 
1 So called because the walls were covered with blackboards.  
 
stead of north and south, so that the rooms on the north side  
were never visited by the sun, and no such rooms are fit to be  
inhabited. Still it was for many years the favorite dormitory,  
and its rooms were the first choice of members of the upper  
classes, not a few of whom, on their return to Amherst, will  
look in vain for the North College of their day 1 as the center of  
some of their most sacred associations. In the winter of 1857,  
it was destroyed by fire, and its site is now occupied by Willis-  
ton Hall.  
 
It was in connection with the site of North College, that the  
process of grading the College grounds began, which, during so  
many years in the poverty of the College, was carried forward  
by the hands of the students, sometimes by individuals work-  
ing out of study hours, and sometimes by a whole class volun-  
teering to devote a half-day or a whole day to the work. . Or  
if the process began earlier, we now find it receiving a special  
and grateful recognition on the records of the Trustees, who,  
at their annual meeting in August, 1827, "having noticed with  
much satisfaction the improvements made in the College grounds*  
and hearing that these were effected principally by the volun-  
tary labors of the students," passed a vote expressing the  
"pleasure they felt in view of these self-denying and benev-  
olent exertions to add to the beauty and convenience of the  
Institution." The same enterprise and public spirit also gave  
birth soon after to the gymnasium in the grove, the bathing es-  
tablishment at the well, and the College band, which, for many  
years, furnished music at exhibitions, Commencements and other  
public occasions.  
 
During the summer term of 1828, the students with the ap-  
probation of the Faculty, organized a sort of interior govern-  
ment, supplementary to that of the Faculty, and designed to se-  
cure more perfect order and quietness in the Institution. A  
legislative body, called the House of Students, enacted laws for  
the protection of the buildings, for the security of the grounds,  
for the better observance of study hours, etc., etc. Then a  
court, with a regularly organized bench, bar, and constabulary,  
 
iFrom 1828 to 1857, this was called North College, and the present North was  
called Middle College during the same period.  
 
enforced the execution of the laws, tried offenders in due form  
and process, and inflicted the penalties affixed to their violation.  
The plan worked smoothly and usefully for about two years, but  
at length a certain class of students grew restive under the re-  
straints and penalties which were imposed ; for  
 
None e'er felt the halter draw,  
With good opinion of the law.  
 
And in 1830, after a most animated, and on one side quite im-  
passioned discussion in the whole body of the students, a small  
ees found themselves deeply in debt. Indeed the College came  
into existence as a chartered Institution with a debt of eight-  
een thousand dollars, the greater part of which, however, was  
" liquidated " by the thirty thousand dollar subscription. The  
erection of the Chapel added some eleven thousand dollars to  
the burden. 1 North College cost ten thousand dollars more.  
The purchase of the lot of land belonging to the estate of Dr.  
Parsons, on which the President's house, and the library now  
stand, and the share taken in the new village church that the  
private subscriptions and donations. 2 But the amount raised in  
this way, was not even sufficient to pay the bills for North  
College. For the remaining and now constantly increasing in-  
debtedness, no resource seemed to be left but an appeal to the  
Legislature. The first application to the Legislature for pecun-  
iary aid was made in the winter session of 1827. The peti-  
tion signed by President Humphrey, in behalf of the Trustees,  
sets forth the pressing necessities of the Institution, and how  
they have arisen, asks nothing more than the means of defray-  
 
1 The building cost fifteen thousand dollars, four thousand of which was contrib-  
uted by the Johnson legacy.  
 
2 It was in this effort that Eev. Mr. Vaill was first appointed agent of the Col-  
lege with a salary of eight hundred dollars, viz., at the annual meeting of the  
 
ing the expenses already incurred for the accommodation of its  
increasing number of pupils, and such further aids and facilities  
for the communication of knowledge as are indispensable to its  
continued prosperity, and urges no claim except the unparal-  
leled private munificence and individual efforts by which it has  
been sustained, and the duty devolved upon the Legislature by  
the constitution, and cheerfully discharged by them in reference  
to the other Colleges of the State, to foster institutions of learn-  
ing established by their authority, and governed in no small  
measure by Trustees of their own choice. This petition was  
referred to a Committee of both Houses, who gave the petition-  
ers a patient hearing, and manifested a willingness on their part  
to aid the College, but " they found the state of the public  
finances incompatible with such aid," and hence felt constrained  
General Court again with substantially the same petition, made  
more urgent by increasing necessities, but only to meet with  
substantially the same result. The committee, consisting of  
Messrs. Gray and Lincoln of Worcester, from' the Senate, and  
Messrs. Baylie of Taunton, Marston of Newburyport, and Wil-  
liams of Northampton, from the House, recognize the necessities  
of the Institution, as also its merits and success. Indeed they  
make an admirable argument in favor of a grant, but with a non  
sequitur, which surprises the reader, they concluded with a rec-  
ommendation that for the present, at least, the grant shall be  
withheld. The last two sentences of their report, read as fol-  
lows : " The degree of public estimation which the College en-  
joys is evidenced by the unexampled success which has attended  
the exertions of its officers, and which has placed it, as regards  
the number of its pupils, in the third rank among the Colleges  
of the United States. Your committee are not unmindful of the  
obligation which the constitution imposes on the Legislature to  
cherish and foster seminaries of learning, and if the present state  
of the treasury would justify it, they would not hesitate to rec-  
ommend that a liberal endowment should be granted to Am-  
herst ; but under existing circumstances it is their opinion that  
 
the further consideration of the petition of Amherst College for  
pecuniary aid, be referred to the first session of the next Gen-  
menced in May, 1841, the petition of the Trustees, and the re-  
port of the committee of the last Legislature were referred to a  
Joint Committee, consisting of Messrs. Lincoln and Brooks of  
the Senate, and Messrs. Huntington of Salem, Bowman of New  
Braintree and Hayes of South Hadley of the House, who were  
unanimously of the opinion that the public interest requires that  
pecuniary aid be afforded to Amherst College, and submitted a  
resolve for that purpose. The resolve gives the College fifty  
thousand dollars in semi-annual installments of two thousand  
would be obtained as soon as the General Court could have time  
to act deliberately upon the subject. Accordingly a new peti-  
tion was drawn up by authority of the Trustees and presented  
in January, 1832. It was referred to a highly respectable com-  
mittee, who adopted substantially the favorable report of pre-  
vious committees, and unanimously submitted the same resolve.  
 
When their report came before the House for discussion in  
Committee of the Whole, the College was attacked with great  
acrimony on the one hand, and defended with distinguished mag-  
nanimity and ability on the other. Mr. Brooks of Bernards-  
ton and Mr. Fuller of Boston, were particularly violent and  
bitter in their opposition. Mr. Foster of Brimfield, Mr. Buck-  
ingham of Boston, Mr. Bliss of Springfield, and Mr. Calhoun of  
Springfield, who was a Trustee and who was then Speaker of the  
House, spoke ably and eloquently in the defence. Mr. Fuller re-  
newed his assault, and continued his slander and vituperation till  
after the usual hour of adjournment. Mr. Calhoun rose again  
and in a brief reply repeUed the charges, and re-asserted the  
strong claims of the College to public patronage. Mr. Bliss  
moved that the committee rise, as he wished to answer the  
 
gence would be granted, and intimated that he also should be  
glad to address the committee. But the majority were deter-  
mined to take the question on the spot. They did take it. It  
went against the College with " fearful odds," and on motion of  
Mr. Sturgis of Boston the whole subject was indefinitely post-  
poned. Thus, after a suspense of five years, during which they  
had obtained the favorable reports of four successive commit-  
tees of the Legislature, were the hopes of the Trustees blasted  
of the Trustees, to consider what was to be done in this critical  
emergency. The Board met on the 6th of March. It was an  
anxious day, and direction was sought of Him who had hitherto  
succored the College in all its perils. Letters full of hope and  
encouragement were read from influential friends in different  
parts of the State, urging them without delay to appeal to the  
public for the aid which the Legislature had so ungraciously re-  
fused. They accordingly resolved to make an immediate appeal  
to the friends of the College, asking for fifty thousand dollars as  
the least sum which would relieve it from debt and future em-  
barrassment. A committee of their own body, consisting of the  
President, Hon. Samuel Lathrop and Hon. William B. Banister,  
was appointed to publish the appeal, and President Humphrey,  
Prof. Fiske, Rev. Mr. Vaill, Rev. Sylvester Holmes of New  
Bedford, Rev. Mr. Hitchcock of Randolph, and Rev. Richard  
and patrons of the College : " It rests with you to decide whether  
it shall live or die. With an empty treasury, exhausted credit,  
a debt of more than thirty-five thousand dollars, and no means  
of paying a dollar of the interest as it accrues at the rate of more  
than forty dollars a month, it can not long survive." The whole  
history of the efforts to obtain pecuniary aid from the Legislature  
with their results was also related in this pamphlet, and it was  
calculated to make a strong impression. But the most effective  
part of the whole appeal was the extracts which were quoted  
 
from the speeches of Mr. Brooks and Mr. Fuller in opposition  
to the bill. The following gems ought to be preserved as speci-  
mens : " Mr. Brooks of Bernardston said he did not think Col-  
leges were needed. There were more lawyers than could get  
a living honestly ; and they had to get a living somehow or other.  
There were doctors to be found in every street of every village,  
with their little saddle-bags ; and they must have a living out  
of the public. There were too many clergymen who, finding  
no places where they could be settled, went about the country  
begging for funds and getting up rag-bag and tag-rag societies.  
He did. not wish to see any more sent about the country, like a  
roaring lion, seeking whom they may devour." l  
 
" Mr. Fuller of Boston said : I hope, sir, these pious pillars  
of Amherst College have not been guilty of what is technically  
called suppressio veri a suppression of the truth. I hope they  
have not reached that degree of piety which leads its possessors  
to practice pious fraud to accomplish a good end.  
 
" Mr. Speaker, I hold in my hand a sermon purporting to have  
been preached by Heman Humphrey, President of Amherst  
College. It was published soon after the incorporation of the  
College, and contains at the close, a list of the students in the  
classes. The whole number is one hundred and twenty-six ;  
and at the bottom are written these significant words, ' hopefully  
pious, ninety-eight.' Of the balance, twenty-eight, nothing is  
said no designation is given to them. It needs no inspiration  
in these days of sectarian watchfulness, to understand that those  
unfortunate twenty-eight are among the ' hopelessly damnable.'  
Sir, has it come to this ? Shall the government of a College,  
professing to rest upon the broad basis of the public good, intro-  
duce such distinctions within their walls, and divide their stu-  
dents into two classes, the one 'hopeful' and the other ' hopeless '  
as to their spiritual concerns ? How must they feel who are not  
among the elect? Such a College must be a school of rank  
Pamphlet.  
 
2 This Mr. Fuller seems to have been an active opposer of the charter in the Leg-  
 
The appeal met with a prompt and hearty response. The  
people of Amherst put their shoulders again to the wheel and  
raised three thousand dollars they had given little short of  
twenty thousand dollars in money before. President Humphrey  
visited Boston the first week in April, and in a few days had  
raised a subscription of seven thousand dollars there. A sub-  
scription was started spontaneously among the Amherst Alumni  
at Andover fifty-seven out of one hundred and fifty-three stu-  
dents at Andover at this time were alumni of Amherst and  
they in their poverty subscribed from ten to twenty-five dollars  
apiece. No agent was necessary. Mr. Fuller, as the writer  
well remembers, was agent enough, and his speech was better  
than any that President Humphrey himself could have made  
in behalf of the College.  
 
The Boston Recorder, in whose columns we find no mention  
of Amherst College during the three years previous, has an edi-  
torial or a communication in behalf of the College in almost every  
issue for several months in 1832, publishing it as a settled point  
that Amherst will receive no aid from the State for one genera-  
tion, declaring the chief reason for the refusal of aid by the  
Legislature to be the avowedly orthodox and religious character  
of the Institution, and calling upon the friends of evangelical  
religion to come to its relief and support it as a strictly religious  
object, and urging in proof that it is so, the facts that all the  
permanent officers but one had from the first been licensed  
preachers, that of two hundred and seventy graduates two hun-  
dred and seven were pious, and that more than one-third of the  
theological students at Andover Seminary were from Amherst  
College. Under the influence of such arguments and appeals,  
evangelical Christians through the State rallied to its support  
with such cordial good will that we find them congratulating  
each other and the College on the rejection of its petition by the  
Legislature. At the Commencement in August it was announced  
that thirty thousand dollars had been subscribed. It was feared  
 
islature of that day. In replying to his speech at this time, Mr. Thayer of Brain-  
tree says, that under the influence of Mr. Fuller, years ago, he had voted against  
 
that the remaining twenty thousand dollars would come with  
great difficulty. But the work went bravely on to its comple-  
tion. And on the last day of the year, December 31, 1832, the  
news being received that the whole sum was made up and the  
subscription was complete, the students expressed their joy in  
the evening by ringing the bells and an illumination of the Col-  
lege buildings, thus celebrating with the beginning of a new  
year, what they believed to be a new era in the history of the  
College.  
 
u The labor of procuring funds was greater than that of pro-  
curing a charter. It was especially an irksome work, and one  
for which Dr. Humphrey thought himself poorly fitted. One  
of the family traditions, however, shows that he had some of  
the requisites of a solicitor. On one of his journeys to Boston  
in the stage-coach of the day, the vehicle stopped at a village  
to take up a lady. The rain was falling, the coach was filled.  
The driver, opening the door, asked if any passenger would re-  
sign his seat for one ' on the deck,' in favor of the lady. No  
one moved for a moment. The next instant, Dr. Humphrey  
was on the ground, and the lady in his place. Some time after-  
wards when this village was canvassed for subscriptions to the  
College, the husband of the lady was called upon. He looked  
at the subscription list, subscribed a handsome sum, and re-  
turned it saying, ' I do not know much about Amherst College,  
but I know its President is a gentleman.' "  
 
" The incessant toil which marked these years, told severely  
even upon his robust constitution. His health was nearly  
broken, when, in the winter of 1834-5, some friends of the Col-  
lege proposed to defray the expenses of a few months' travel in  
Europe for the restoration of his flagging energies." 1 The  
Trustees cheerfully voted him leave of absence. He sailed for  
Liverpool in the spring of 1835, and was absent over Commence-  
ment. Rev. Dr. Packard instructed the Senior Class in Moral  
Philosophy, and aided the Faculty in the preaching and the re-  
ligious services of the Chapel during the summer term. Prof.  
Hitchcock acted as Vice-President and Chairman of the Faculty,  
preached the Baccalaureate sermon, and presided at the Com-  
 
1 Memorial Sketches of Dr. and Mrs. Humphrey, by his son.  
 
mencement exercises. A series of letters, written by Dr. Hum-  
phrey during this journey, and running over with his character-  
istic humor and good sense, was printed in the New York Ob-  
server, and had a wide circulation. He returned late in the  
autumn with recuperated health and enlarged resources to re-  
sume his College duties, and to make his influence felt more  
widely than ever in the community. But he ceased from this  
time to instruct the Senior class in Intellectual and Moral Philos-  
ophy. A Professorship in this department had been instituted  
for the purpose of relieving the President from those excessive  
labors, which, together with the unavoidable responsibilities of  
his office, and the peculiar anxieties growing out of the pecu-  
niary condition of the College, were manifestly undermining  
his health. The Professor entered on his duties during the ab-  
sence of Dr. Humphrey in Europe. And since his inaugura-  
tion, the Professorship of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy  
has ceased to be connected with the Presidency. It was an  
important, it may almost be called a radical change. So far as  
that most important department is concerned, it was undoubt-  
edly an advance. Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, not less  
than Mathematics, or Physics, is quite enough to task the en-  
ergies and occupy the time of any Professor. Perhaps the  
change was indispensable, being at once the unavoidable effect  
of the growth of the College, and the necessary condition of its  
continued progress. But it contained the seeds of a revolution  
quite unforeseen by the actors in it. And like other revolu-  
tions, it involved incidental dangers, evils and sacrifices. The  
President, who would be all that Dr. D wight was in Yale Col-  
lege, or all that Dr. Humphrey was in the first twelve years of  
his connection with Amherst College, must be the principal  
teacher of the Senior class. The President, who would com-  
mand the highest veneration and affection of the students, must  
be more than a police officer, or administrator of the govern-  
ment and discipline of the College he must be the acknowl-  
edged intellectual, moral and spiritual, as well as official head of  
the Institution.  
 
During the presidency of Dr. Moore, and the first ten years  
 
continued unchanged, according to which morning prayers and  
the morning recitation were not only held before breakfast, but  
were held at hours varying from month to month, sometimes  
changing almost from week to week, according to the season of  
the year, so as to bring the recitation at the earliest hour at  
which it could well be heard by daylight. The breakfast hour  
was thus very late in midwinter, and yet the light in cloudy  
weather was often very imperfect for the morning recitation. In  
1833, by vote of the Faculty, the bell for morning prayers was  
fixed at a quarter before five in summer and a quarter before six  
in winter. And this was done at the request of the students, a  
large majority of whom petitioned for the change. This fact is  
worthy of note, as illustrating the character and spirit of the  
students at the time. And the arrangement of recitations and  
study hours, which was thus introduced, and which continued for  
many years, was, in some respects, preferable to either that which  
preceded, or any which has followed it. The student's working  
day was thus divided into three nearly equal parts, in each of  
which two or three hours were set apart for study, and each  
period of study-hours was followed immediately by a recitation.  
Recitations at intervening and irregular hours were carefully  
avoided, and in order to avoid them, the Tutors, and to some  
extent the Professors did not confine themselves to one depart-  
ment, but heard different divisions of the same class at the same  
hour, in the morning, perhaps in Greek, at noon in Latin, and  
in the afternoon in Mathematics. The standard of instruction  
and of scholarship has doubtless been elevated by the present  
system, which assigns to every instructor his special department.  
But it is attended with the incidental disadvantage of necessitat-  
ing recitations at almost every hour of the day, and thus break-  
ing up the regular succession of study-hours and recitations, des-  
troying, in fact, the very existence of uniform study-hours for  
all Colleges. One who has seen and experienced the advantages  
of both, while on the whole he prefers the new, may be par-  
doned for casting back a look of regret on some of the conven-  
iences and felicities of the old arrangement.  
 
The observance of study-hours was enforced with much strict-  
 
perhaps the most frequent. This was the day when fines were  
in vogue in all the Colleges, and when in Amherst College the  
system rose to its highest, (or sunk to its lowest,) pitch of per-  
fection. Fines were imposed for exercise or bathing in study-  
hours, for playing on a musical instrument, for firing a gun near  
the College buildings, for attending the village church without  
permission. In short, fines seem to have been the sovereign  
remedy for all the ills that College was heir to. The records  
of the Faculty in these days preserve the memory of fines im-  
posed on students who now adorn some of the highest places at  
the bar, on the bench, and in the pulpit, to say nothing of the  
medical profession. This much at least may be said to the credit  
of the Faculty, that they were impartial in their administration ;  
for we find a vote recorded imposing a fine of fifty cents a week  
on any member of the Faculty who should fail to visit every  
week the rooms of the students assigned him for such parochial  
visitation ! But Prof. Fiske entered his protest, and the vote  
was soon rescinded. 1  
 
At the annual meeting of the Trustees in 1832, a change in  
the vacations, which had been discussed at the two preceding  
annual meetings, was adopted, and went into effect the next  
collegiate year. The vacations had hitherto been four weeks  
from the fourth Wednesday of August, (Commencement,) six  
weeks from the fourth Wednesday of December, and three  
weeks from the second Wednesday of May. They were now  
changed to six weeks from the fourth Wednesday of August,  
two weeks from the second Wednesday of January, and four  
weeks from the first Wednesday of May. . The most important  
feature of the change was that the long vacation which had  
hitherto been in the winter, was henceforth to be in the autumn.  
The new arrangement was ideally better, perhaps, both for offi-  
cers and students, inasmuch as the autumn is the pleasanter  
season for recreation, and the winter more suitable and conven-  
ient for study. But it was quite unsuitable and inconvenient  
for that large class of students who had been accustomed to  
help themselves by teaching in the winter. The Trustees pro-  
vided that they might still be allowed to teach twelve weeks of  
 
each College year, including either of the three vacations, and  
it was hoped that they might find select schools in the fall as re-  
munerative as common schools in the winter. But the experi-  
ment proved unsuccessful, and after a trial of eight years, in 1840  
the College returned to a modified and improved plan, of which,  
however, the essential principle was a long winter vacation.  
 
At their annual meeting in 1833, the Trustees voted to relin-  
quish the old practice of having a forenoon and afternoon ses-  
sion at Commencement, separated by the corporation dinner;  
and at the Commencement in 1834 the new system of one ses-  
the impression prevailed that the President's house, which was  
built for Dr. Moore in 1821, was damp and unhealthy. At a  
special meeting of the Board in October, 1833, the Trustees re-  
quested the Prudential Committee to ascertain how much of  
the recent fifty thousand dollar subscription would remain after  
the payment of the College debts, and in case there should  
prove to be a sufficient balance, they authorized the committee  
to make immediate arrangements for the erection of a new house,  
at an expense not exceeding five thousand dollars. On investi-  
gation, the Prudential Committee estimated that after discharg-  
ing all debts there would be a balance in the treasury of about  
four thousand dollars, which, with the sum realized by the sale  
of the old house, would be sufficient to cover the expense of  
the new. They accordingly sold the old house for two thousand  
five hundred dollars, and commenced the erection of a new one  
on land recently purchased of the Parsons' estate directly oppo-  
site the College edifices ; and "during 1834 and 1835 the house  
was built, not by contract, but by days' works, and the conse-  
 
1 Reminiscences of Amherst College, pp. 68-9. Dr. Hitchcock not only com-  
plains of the amount of the bills for which, during Dr. Humphrey's absence in  
 
appoint a special agent for the immediate collection of the bal-  
ance of the fifty thousand dollar subscription, and directed the  
Prudential Committee " to proceed with all convenient dispatch  
to erect an additional College hall, provided they can procure  
funds for the purpose by donation, or by loan upon the security  
of a pledge of the building to be erected and its income, for the  
repayment." During the years 1835 and 1836, the process of  
grading the grounds in front of the existing edifices and prepar-  
ing a site for a new hall at the south end of the row, was com-  
menced and carried forward at an expense of two or three thou-  
sand dollars. But the hall was not erected, doubtless for the  
very good reason that the funds could not be obtained ; and the  
site was reserved for the erection of the Appleton Cabinet under  
more auspicious circumstances.  
 
At the same meeting of the Board (1834), the tuition was  
raised one dollar a term. At the annual meeting in 1836, there  
was a further addition of one dollar a term, thus making the  
tuition at this time eleven dollars a term and thirty-three dol-  
lars a year. At the same time the salaries of the Professors  
were increased from eight hundred dollars to one thousand and  
a corresponding increase was made in the salary of the Presi-  
dent. The Tutors' salaries remained as they had been for a few  
years previous, viz., four hundred and fifty dollars. The last  
votes at this meeting, one or two of mere form excepted, were  
as follows : " Voted that the Prudential Committee be directed,  
in view of the urgent necessities of the College, to apply to the  
Legislature of this Commonwealth at their next session for pe-  
cuniary aid.  
 
" Voted that should the application to the Legislature fail of  
success, or should it be deemed by the committee inexpedient to  
make such application, the Prudential Committee be further au-  
thorized to adopt any such measures as may by them be deemed  
expedient for procuring aid from such other sources as may seem  
to promise the desired relief."  
 
The number of students at the close of the period now under  
review, that is, in 1836, was large nearly as large as it has been  
at any time since, and the College was in a highly prosperous  
state. Yet the discerning reader can hardly fail to have discov-  
 
ered in our narrative of this very period seeds of trouble which  
will be seen springing up and bearing fruit in our subsequent  
history.  
 
The following picture of Prof. Fiske in the character of a so-  
liciting agent belongs to this period, and will be read with inter-  
est : " My father was in the field ' over the hill,' ' the six acre  
lot,' plowing with one yoke of oxen and 'old Sorrel.' Two gen-  
tlemen in dark broadcloth come in sight on the brow of the field.  
They meet the very reverent farmer. It was his pastor, ' Mr.  
Snell,' and an extremely gentle man in air and manner. That  
trim, blue surtout and spectacles, and that polished accent, were  
Prof. N. W. Fiske's. Amherst College was in distress. This  
gentleman had come to solicit aid for it ; and the minister left  
his study to guide and help him. Well do I remember the mes-  
sage to my mother in the house, ' Tell her it is in the big pocket-  
book, and she'll know the bill, for it's the largest one in the  
pocket-book.' The boy that was driving the oxen then first be-  
gan to think about ' going to College,' if such men came from  
College, and father cares so much as that for it. The next Sab-  
bath Prof. Fiske preached from ' O Israel, thou hast destroyed  
thyself.' He had one watchful hearer. Such nicety of word  
and manner held fast the plow-boy who had seen him from hat  
to boots in our field two days before."  
 
That North Brookfield plow-boy entered College in 1835, and  
attracted to Amherst by the rare beauty of the situation and the  
singular prosperity of the College, Daniel Webster visited the  
Institution. I was then a student ; and I shall never forget, nor  
will any one who was then a member of College ever forget the  
brief address which he made to the officers and students who  
gathered in the Library to see him and do him honor. His felici-  
tous allusion to the bow of Ulysses, especially, sent an arrow  
into more than one youthful bosom, and gave a new charm to  
the study of the classics.  
 
