CHAPTER XIX.  
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF DR. HITCHCOCK AND SOME OF  
.HIS ASSOCIATES.  
 
DR. HITCHCOCK'S " Reminiscences of Amherst College " is at  
the sazae time an autobiography, almost the last production of  
his pen, and so fresh, so graphic, so truthful and unconscious  
that no one who can read it will care to read any other. The  
writer of this History has also given to the public a delineation  
of his life and character in the sermon which was delivered at  
his funeral. An extended biography will not, therefore, be ex-  
pected or attempted here. At the same time, some of the lead-  
ing facts of his life and the characteristics of the man should be  
set down to complete the history of his administration.  
 
The principal facts in a synoptical form and in chronological  
order are as follows: He was born in Deerfield, Franklin County,  
Mass., May 24, 1793 ; was principal of the academy in his native  
place from 1815 to 1818 ; was ordained pastor of the Congrega-  
tional Church in Conway, June 21, 1821, and dismissed in Octo-  
ber, 1825; elected Professor of Chemistry and Natural History  
in Amherst College, August 23, 1825 ; appointed State Geolo-  
gist of Massachusetts, June 26, 1830, and of the First District  
of New York, June 13, 1836 ; received the degree of Doctor of  
Laws from Harvard University, in 1840; was chosen President  
of Amherst College and Professor of Natural Theology and  
Geology, December 16, 1844 ; received the degree of Doctor of  
Divinity from Middlebury College, in 1846 ; was appointed  
commissioner of the State government to examine the agricul-  
 
pointed to complete the Geological Survey of the State of Ver-  
mont, in April, 1857 ; and continued to lecture, in the depart-  
ment of Geology and Natural Theology, with some assistance  
from his sons, till 1864, when he was called to higher honors  
and nobler services in heaven.  
 
His father, Justin Hitchcock, was a man of strong mind,  
sterling sense and steadfast piety, a hatter by trade, a soldier in  
the Revolutionary War, and a deacon in the Congregational  
Church. His mother, a Hoyt, was a woman of active mind  
and marked character, but subject to nervous debility and de-  
pression of spirits. The son, it need not. be said, united in him-  
self the characteristics of both his parents, the intellectual  
and moral stamina of the one and the acute, nervous sensibility  
of the other.  
 
His boyhood was spent in working on a farm, with a turn  
occasionally at carpentering and surveying. Obliged to labor  
through the day, he studied books and the stars by night. He  
set out to prepare himself for an advanced standing in Harvard  
University ; but a fit of sickness so weakened his eyes, already  
injured by night study and over-exertion, that he was obliged  
to relinquish a college education.  
 
He began early, though not precociously, to write much, at  
first for his own improvement, then for the press. A manu-  
script volume of three hundred pages is preserved which he  
began in 1813, at the age of twenty, and which, in a single  
year, he had filled nearly full with essays, poems, letters and  
addresses on scientific, political, moral and religious subjects.  
His first publication was a dramatic poem, of five hundred lines,  
which was first acted before the rural population of his na-  
tive place, and then in obedience to their call printed in 1815.  
His next appearance before the public was in quite another  
capacity, that of a mathematician and astronomer, wherein he  
corrected the errors of the Nautical Almanac, and received  
at length the reluctant thanks and acknowledgment of the  
editor. This was in 1817 and 1818, while he was Principal of  
Deerfield Academy. It was at this same period that he expe-  
rienced (partly under the influence of the young lady who  
was his assistant teacher, and who afterwards became his wife)  
 
that radical change in his religious belief and in his whole  
character, which gave a new and unexpected direction to  
his subsequent life. Following the drift of the church in  
Deerfield, he had embraced the Unitarian creed, and regarded  
Orthodoxy with mingled hatred and contempt. But led by  
the mysterious Providence and abounding grace of God, he  
first submitted his heart and will to the practical claims of the  
gospel, and was thus prepared at length cordially to embrace  
not only the Orthodox, but the Calvinistic creed.  
 
During his brief pastorate in Conway, of about four years,  
there were two general revivals of religion, and many were  
added to the church. His sermons at this time were short, sel-  
dom over thirty minutes, clear, forcible, considerably exegetical  
and sufficiently doctrinal, but always eminently practical and  
spiritual. Most of them were afterwards heard with great  
pleasure and profit by many generations of College students,  
for it was not until he became President that he wrote many  
new sermons. There was great variety in his preaching. He  
once preached a sermon from the word " Selah," as a text, of  
which the doctrine was, " Stop and think." While his theol-  
ogy was of the old school, he was practically a new measure  
man. He had a profound veneration for Mr. Nettleton, and in  
efforts to promote revivals trod in his footsteps, or rather  
showed a similar wisdom in the use of a variety of suitable  
means.  
 
During his pastorate in Conway, he found exercise and rec-  
reation in making a scientific survey of the western coun-  
ties of Massachusetts. This was the beginning of that life  
among the rocks and mountains, which was ever after a de-  
light and almost a passion. Like the giant in classical my-  
thology, whenever he could plant his foot on the bosom of  
Mother Earth, he was in his element, it was his strength,  
his health, his life. This was also the origin of the geological  
survey of the entire State, which was afterwards made by the  
government, at his suggestion, and which has the honor of  
originating that series of scientific surveys which have since  
 
The way was thus prepared for his appointment to be the  
first Professor of Chemistry and Natural History in Amherst  
College. The boy in Deerfield was father to the man in Am-  
herst, and the Amherst scientific collections had their germs and  
roots among the rocks and hills of Con way. After some study  
and practice in the laboratory of Prof. Silliman, at New Ha-  
ven, he entered upon the duties of his office. For many years  
he was the sole Professor in all the departments of Natural His-  
tory. He lectured and instructed in Chemistry, Botany, Mineral-  
ogy, Geology, Zoology, Anatomy and Physiology, Natural Theol-  
ogy ; and sometimes to fill a temporary vacancy he was the  
most suitable person the College could depute to teach also Nat-  
ural Philosophy and Astronomy. It was when he was teach-  
ing Enfield's Natural Philosophy to the Class of '30 (I well re-  
member, and the class will probably remember it with me),  
that a member of the class, the oldest and most venerable mem-  
ber, who had been annoyed by a classmate sitting behind him  
till he could no longer endure it, rose in his seat, turned delib-  
erately around, and struck the offender on the side of his head  
with that huge quarto volume, thus beating into him more phi-  
losophy than he ever learned before. The blow rang through  
the room and provoked the suppressed applause of the class,  
but never called forth a word of reproof or remonstrance  
from our wise and patient Professor. For a short time there  
was an awful pause, and then the recitation went on as if  
nothing had happened. Prof. Hitchcock was too easy and  
too indulgent to be a prime teacher. But Amherst College  
never had a more inspiring lecturer, and it may be doubted  
whether the general, consistent and comprehensive view of  
all the branches of Chemistry and Natural History which he  
gave to his classes, did not meet the wants of College stu-  
dents did not subserve the purposes of College education  
better than the fuller and more specific courses of two or  
three or half a dozen savants or special lecturers would have  
done in his place.  
 
For two or three years in and near 1830 his mind, his  
heart, his tongue and his pen were given to the subject of tem-  
 
more immediate duties of his professorship ; and the result was  
the establishment of the Anti-venenian Society in College, and  
the publication of several books, tracts, articles and essays  
among the rest a prize essay which have identified his name  
with the history of the temperance reformation scarcely less  
than with the advancement of science.  
 
No sooner was this work accomplished than he entered with  
all his soul upon the series of geological explorations and sci-  
entific surveys which occupied all the time he could spare from  
the College for the greater part of ten years. He did but one  
chapters. Its value to the Institution can not be overestimated.  
His weight of character and his wise policy we have said it  
publicly before l and we wish to repeat it and put it on record  
his weight of character and his wise policy saved the College,  
Having accomplished the object for which he accepted the office,  
he resigned the command with far greater satisfaction than he  
took it, and fell back again into the ranks rose again let us  
rather say, for so he viewed it, to those unclouded heights of  
science and religion on which he had before delighted to stand,  
but which now appeared to him more beautiful than ever as  
he looked back upon the region of clouds and storm through  
which he had passed. At the request of the Trustees he re-  
tained the professorship of Natural Theology and Geology.  
According to his, own proposal, he received only half the usual  
salary of a Professor. He held this professorship almost the  
same length of time as he had occupied the presidential chair,  
between nine and ten years. For some years he lectured on his  
favorite themes with his characteristic ardor bordering on en-  
thusiasm. He delivered lectures before lyceums and addresses  
on public occasions. He revised his principal works and pub-  
lished new ones. The second edition of his Religion of Geol-  
 
and the third edition of the " Phenomena of the Seasons," with  
additions, in 1861. In 1859, the Faculty and students presented  
him with a beautiful service of silver plate which gratified him  
much as an expression of the gratitude and affection of those  
whom he had so tenderly loved and so faithfully served. The  
same year he was brought to the borders of the grave. Phy-  
sicians and friends despaired of his life. If he had died then, the  
world would have said, it was a completed life. But not so  
heavenly wisdom. Before heaven could say to him " Servant of  
God, well done," he must live on through five more years of  
suffering, years of dying they almost seemed to him, still writing  
and publishing, still, like the aged Athenian sage, learning  
many things, still interpreting nature and studying his own  
frame so fearfully and wonderfully made, still lecturing to his  
classes even after he was too feeble to go to them and therefore  
invited them to come to him, still making large and choice col-  
lections for his cabinets, still caring and planning for his beloved  
College, still toiling to enlarge the boundaries of science, still  
watching with jealousy his own heart, the spiritual condition of  
the College, and the interests of evangelical religion all the  
while battling heroically with death and " him that has the  
power of death," and nobly illustrating the triumph of mind  
over matter, of faith and philosophy over all the powers of  
darkness even in the last extremity. All his life-time he had  
been more or less subject to bondage through constitutional  
depression and fear of death. But he died leaning his head  
on the Cross of Christ almost visibly present by his side, and  
wondering at the riches of redeeming and sustaining grace.  
At the' time of his death which was on the 27th of Feb-  
ruary, 1864, he had not quite reached the age of seventy-  
one. On the 2d of March, a great congregation, consisting  
of the Faculty and students, Trustees and alumni of the Col-  
lege, scientific men and clergymen from every part of the  
State, together with great numbers of people of all classes  
from Amherst and the neighboring towns, assembled in the  
village church to attend his funeral and thence followed the  
body to its last resting-place in the cemetery. The spot  
is now marked by a plain granite obelisk bearing, together  
 
with the dates of his birth and death, this simple and truthful  
inscription :  
 
But his best and most enduring monument is in his work in  
the College which he restored, and in the influence which he ex-  
erted upon the church and the world by his tongue and his pen,  
and through the life and character of his three or four thousand  
pupils. Nor can the history of Mount Holyoke Seminary, any  
more than that of Amherst College, be written without large  
reference to Dr. Hitchcock, of whose family Miss Lyon was a  
member, when she was laying broad and deep her plans for  
founding it, and whose tongue and pen were among the chief  
organs for communicating those plans to the public. These two  
Institutions will perpetuate his name and his influence so long  
"Reminiscences" a record of the titles and dates of twenty-  
four volumes, thirty-five pamphlets, (sermons, etc.,) ninety-four  
papers in the journals, and eighty newspaper articles, two hun-  
dred and thirty-three in all, and making up a sum total of over  
eight thousand printed pages. Writing for the press was a  
luxury to him in health, a solace under depression of spirits,  
and a resource in his declining years. " Realizing how few,  
if any of these productions will survive the present genera-  
tion," and persuaded that " if any of them do, it will be owing  
to their connection with Christianity," he says, " the work  
which I did aim to make of permanent value, Providence  
never allowed me to write. I mean a treatise on Natural  
 
and a few of the braces and pins of the edifice I had hoped to  
build."  
 
Dr. Hitchcock was a large man. His frame was large, his  
mind was large, his heart was large. He was largely endowed  
with all the powers and faculties proper to man, which, accord-  
ing to the best definition we have ever seen of that much abused  
word, constitutes real genius. It were not easy to say, whether  
observation or reflection, perception or memory, reason or imag-  
ination was his predominant faculty. He had more faith than  
most men in new discoveries. This believing disposition some-  
times welcomed a premature announcement or a fabrication, like  
the celebrated moon-hoax ; but it expected great things, at-  
tempted great things and achieved great things for science. It  
wrought miracles in the scientific world.  
 
Wit and humor were not wanting in him, as, according to  
Coleridge, genius never is destitute of those qualities. Now  
and then a publication of his is overflowing with facetiousness  
and fun, like the Zoological Temperance Convention in South  
Africa. Only a short time before his death, he called my atten-  
tion to a huge boulder of pure copper, which lay in his sick-  
room, and invited me to put it in my pocket and carry it home  
with me.  
 
There was almost a ludicrous side to the extreme sensitive-  
ness of his nature, and the suffering often apparently unneces-  
sary, yet always dreadfully real to him, which it caused him.  
I shall never forget the notes which he jotted down from hour  
to hour, and sent back from Halifax, on his voyage to England.  
The colors in which he paints his sufferings grow darker and  
darker every hour, till at length he calls on his children to be  
so much greatness was accompanied with such unaffected mod-  
esty and humility ; such simplicity in language, style and man-  
ners ; such a constant exemplification of the lowlier and so-  
called lesser virtues. He was temperate in all things ; he prac-  
ticed economy as a Christian duty ; he was scrupulously honest  
in the most trivial matters ; he insisted on conducting business  
 
according to the golden rule. Finally, it was the highest glory  
and the chief joy of this great and good man, that he was an  
humble, penitent, believing and adoring disciple of Christ. His  
lectures and teachings, wherever they might begin, were sure  
to end as the Bible ends, at the throne of God and the Lamb.  
His greatest book, " The Religion of Geology," is the type of  
his writings and of his life. The following commemorative  
minute, entered on the records of the Trustees, is worthy of  
preservation in this History, not only as a just tribute to the  
memory of Dr. Hitchcock, but also as an illustration of the  
light in which he was seen by such men as Hon. William B.  
results of their labors for the benefit of those among whom  
they lived and labored. Guided by this rule, the late Presi-  
dent Hitchcock is seen everywhere around us. Though dead,  
truly he yet speaketh. Nowhere can we look, without his mark  
standing prominently out. And so will it be, while Amherst  
College shall continue to be known among men. Often as she  
may change her external dress, there will always remain from  
generation to generation the foot-prints and the head-prints  
of Edward Hitchcock. He stands connected with the early  
struggles of the College. He is known and seen in every effort  
that was made, from whatever quarter, to give it standing and  
character before the public and amongst its fellows, and to get  
earnest and thoroughly armed. In bringing science to a full  
and constant recognition of God, and of that religion which  
came from God, as it was the joy of his heart, so did it success-  
delight in recalling the numberless graces of his character, and  
gladly would we descant upon them at large. But we desire  
simply to plant here upon the Records of the Trustees this  
 
hearty and full-souled memorial. ' Primus inter pares ' will find  
no ungrateful response in any heart that has ever been animated  
with love and reverence for Amherst College."  
 
This minute is followed by a vote, that " the Collection of  
foot-prints in possession of the College be called the Hitchcock  
Ichnological Cabinet, in honor of our late lamented President,  
Edward Hitchcock." The portrait bust which fitly adorns this  
Cabinet, the fruit of Prof. Mather's exertions and of Milrnore's  
genius, was contributed by alumni and other friends of Dr.  
Hitchcock, and is the best remaining representation of his noble  
form and features.  
 
Few men have owed so much to their wives as Dr. Hitch-  
cock owed to his. She led him to Christ; she taught him how  
to live. Going down into the dark valley just before him, she  
taught him how to die. She alone made life desirable or endur-  
able to him. If she had gone down to the grave a quarter of a  
century sooner than she did, it could not have been long before  
he would have followed her. The even flow of her spirits al-  
ways balanced the unevenness of his. Her equanimity was the  
balance-wheel and her good sense the regulator of his domestic  
and social life. Her pencil illustrated all his books, 1 and hung  
the walls of his lecture-rooms with diagrams. She opened her  
parlors for Freshman and Senior levees, and set the example  
which was followed by other ladies of the Faculty, of a recep-  
tion, to which students of all classes might come once a fort-  
night without invitation, and spend an evening in social improve-  
ment and enjoyment with the families of the College and the vil-  
lage. At the same time, her cultured simplicity and tasteful  
economy in dress and style of living and in the entertainment  
of company exerted an influence which has not yet entirely  
ceased to be felt in the College and the community. The Col-  
lege was indebted to the rare self-denial and Christian sympathy  
of Mrs. Hitchcock scarcely less than to the wisdom and fervor  
 
a benediction behind them. To her, also, with the hearty co-  
operation of the other ladies, the College chapel owed its first  
renovation, early in Dr. Hitchcock's presidency. Never did a  
husband pay a more graceful compliment to a wife than Dr.  
Jlitchcock paid to Mrs. Hitchcock, in dedicating to her his  
greatest work, and never did a wife better deserve such a com-  
pliment. Well might he say, in his last work: "How provi-  
dential that such a wife should be given me ; " and all the  
nine years of Dr. Hitchcock's presidency, is a fact without a  
parallel in the history of the College. We have already given  
a biographical sketch of Prof. Fiske. This is the place for  
Mass., December 6, 1816, was graduated with the second appoint-  
ment in the Class of '35, was an eminently popular and success-  
ful Tutor from 1838 to 1840, was married to a daughter of Rev.  
Dr. Codman of Dorchester in 1846, and settled in the ministry  
over the Congregational Church in East Randolph for several  
years, till greatly to the regret of his people, he was dismissed  
in December, 1849, that he might become Professor of Latin in  
the College where he was educated. He entered upon his new  
duties in the winter term of 1849-50, with characteristic ardor,  
and with promise of abundant usefulness. He had heard his  
classes only about six weeks. He had preached with great ac-  
ceptance, two or three times in the College chapel. He was  
just beginning to make himself useful, honored and beloved  
as a teacher and preacher, as a neighbor and friend, when he  
was attacked with scarlet fever, and after a sickness of only a  
few days, died on the 27th of February, 1850, at the age of  
thirty-nine. Seldom has an event occurred which so deeply  
moved the College, and so excited the sympathies of the entire  
community. Its effect in deepening and extending the religious  
interest among the students, has been already mentioned. His  
own religious life began in the revival of 1835, and ended, nay,  
 
began anew, was multiplied and perpetuated in that of 1850.  
His fine person and agreeable manners, his generous impulses  
and warm affections, his high attainments and higher aspira-  
tions as a scholar, and his sincere, graceful and growing piety,  
will long be remembered by his colleagues and his pupils, short  
as his connection was with Amherst College.  
 
Prof. Charles Baker Adams was born in Dorchester, Mass.,  
January 11, 1814. Having fitted for College at Phillips Acad-  
emy, Andover, he entered Yale College in October, 1830, and in  
the second year of his course came to Amherst, where he grad-  
uated with the highest honors in the Class of '34. In Octo-  
ber, 1834, he became a member o*f the Theological Seminary at  
Andover. But his heart was in the physical sciences. His  
Bachelor's and his Master's oration were both on these sciences,  
the one on their use, and the other on their relative importance.  
In June, 1836, he left his theological studies to assist Prof.  
Hitchcock in a geological survey of the State of New York. 1  
The year 1836-7, he spent as a Tutor in Amherst College. In  
September, 1838, he accepted an appointment as Professor of  
Chemistry and Natural History in Middlebury College, which  
office he discharged with characteristic zeal and signal ability  
for nine years, during which time he also made an able and sat-  
isfactory geological survey of the State of Vermont, publishing  
annual reports, collecting several complete series of the rocks,  
shells and soils, and thus laying the foundations of his cabinets,  
and Geology, and Curator of the cabinet in Amherst College,  
which office he held five years, discharging its duties with inde-  
fatigable zeal, increasing acceptance and growing reputation till  
he fell victim to his ruling passion. Led, partly by the state of  
his health and partly for the sake of scientific explorations and  
collections, to visit the tropical climates, he spent the winters of  
1844-5 and 1848-9 in Jamaica, and 1850-1 at Panama. In  
 
1 This survey was relinquished by Dr. Hitchcock on account of his health. The  
 
December, 1852, he visited St. Thomas for similar purposes ; but  
he had scarcely reached the island and entered with his usual  
enthusiasm upon his researches, when he was attacked by the  
prevailing yellow fever, and died on the 19th of January, 1853.  
In conjunction with Prof. Alonzo Gray of Brooklyn, he had just  
completed an elementary work on Geology. He had studied  
thoroughly the mollusks of the seas and shores which he visited,  
and partly published the results in monographs and scientific  
journals. A new field, that of Zoological Geography, was open-  
ing before his original and comprehensive mind, with bright  
and irresistible attractions. He was with us only five years.  
He was scarcely forty at the time of his death. But those who  
saw the rapidity with which his plans widened, and the results  
of his labors increased during the last few years of his life, could  
not But feel that he was arrested on the very threshold of new  
and vast discoveries, which would have greatly enlarged the  
boundaries of science, and shed a far brighter lustre on his own  
name and that of the Institution with which he was connected.  
 
The Zoological Cabinet of Amherst College is not his only,  
but it is his sufficient monument. Prof. Agassiz said of it, " I  
do not know in the whole country a Conchological collection of  
equal value ;" and Dr. Gould testified that, " as a scientific col-  
lection, it is not equalled in some respects, by any other collec-  
tion in the world." There are, doubtless, larger collections, but  
a collection so perfectly classified and arranged, labeled and ex-  
hibited to the eye, and all the work of one man, with no resources  
but his genius and his own unconquerable will, and that man cut  
down almost at the commencement of his labors such a cabi-  
net, we venture to say, the world does not contain.  
 
The history of science furnishes few more remarkable instan-  
ces of great intellectual power, impelled by an ardor bordering  
on enthusiasm, and yet guided by a judgment approaching to  
scientific intuition, and of a comprehensive discipline acquired  
by the impartial study and mastery of all the branches of a lib-  
eral education, and then concentrated, like the rays that fall  
upon a parabolic mirror, in a single focal point of the in tensest  
 
jected to the most rigid, undeviating, unbending system and  
method. He seldom smiled, and almost never laughed. From  
his external appearance, you would judge him incapable of wit  
or humor. Yet ever and anon a flash of dry wit broke from  
those marble lips which moved the hearers to laughter, and the  
more irresistibly, because it produced not the slightest change  
in the countenance of the speaker. A student was once recit-  
ing to him with little or no knowledge of his lesson. Question  
after question was asked, and answered wrong. To each answer  
the Professor responded, "Not correct." "Well, then," said  
the student, in a tone of some impatience, " I don't know any-  
the class, by bringing in a bug gotten up for the purpose, and  
asking him what genus it belonged to. " The genus Humbug,"  
was the ready answer.  
 
His speech and outward action were indicative of impertur-  
bable calmness, nay of the coldness of pure intellect without a  
spark of passion or emotion. But beneath that cold exterior  
like the perpetual and unchanging snow and ice of Hecla, there  
was a soul of fire a volcanic intensity of thought and feeling  
and action which nothing could chill and nothing withstand  
which made him a man of irresistible power. The impression  
produced on the College by the news of Prof. Adams' death, is  
thus briefly and incidentally described in a letter by a member  
of the Class of '55: l "In January, Converse died, and his death  
cast a gloom over the class. He was young and rather a pet in  
the class. The same month came the news of the death of  
Prof. Adams who was much respected though little known by  
the students. The sermons preached in the Chapel the follow-  
ing Sunday by Prof. Haven deepened the impression made by  
the news. It was a dark, rainy, gloomy day. The Chapel was  
draped in black. It seemed as though everything was mourning."  
 
Nine Trustees terminated their connection with the College  
by death or resignation during the presidency of Dr. Hitchcock.  
 
former chapter, the mover of the resolution iu the Franklin  
Association of Congregational Ministers which first publicly rec-  
ommended Arnherst as the most eligible site for a new College  
in Hampshire County. From that day to the day of his death,  
for more than forty years, he was among the most unwavering  
friends and the wisest counselors of the Institution, and during  
nearly all these years he was a member either of the Board of  
Overseers of the Charity Fund or of the Board of Trustees.  
He was born in North Bridge water, Mass., March 4, 1769, but  
removed with his father's family to Cummington when he was  
five years old. He worked on a farm till he was twenty-one,  
and expected to be a farmer until, soon after his conversion and  
connection with the church, he was moved to prepare for the  
ministry. He entered Dartmouth College in 1792 and gradua-  
ted iif 1796 with one of the first honors of his class. He studied  
Theology under Rev. Dr. Burton of Thetford, Vt., then quite  
famous as the author of the " Taste Scheme " of Divinity, of  
which Mr. Packard became a zealous advocate. On the 20th  
of February, 1799, he was ordained pastor of the Church in  
Shelburne of which he was sole pastor for almost thirty years,  
colleague with his son, Theophilus, nearly fourteen years, and  
nominal pastor without salary or service thirteen years longer  
until his death. In 1830 and again in 1839 both among the  
lege from 1810 to 1825, and in 1824, notwithstanding all the  
censure and ill-will which he incurred by his efforts for the re-  
moval of the College, that Board conferred on him the degree  
of Doctor of Divinity.  
 
From 1821 to 1835, Dr. Packard was a member of the Board  
of Overseers of the Charity Fund of Amherst College. In  
1832 he was elected a member of the Board of Trustees, and in  
1854, oppressed by the burden of fourscore and five years, he  
resigned his trust at the same time that his friend Dr. Hitchcock  
retired from the presidency. He died September 17, 1855, and  
Dr. Hitchcock preached his funeral sermon on the 19th in the  
 
vened at Shelburne to attend the Franklin County Church Con-  
ference and Benevolent Anniversaries. In this sermon, which  
was published, Dr. Hitchcock says : " For forty-five years he  
scarcely ever failed of being present at the Commencement of  
one or the other of these Institutions (Williams or Amherst).  
Of the latter he was one of the earliest, most active and most  
efficient founders and promoters. When it was necessary to  
incur odium and reproach to sustain and advance its interests,  
ard spent most of the summer term in Amherst, occupying  
the Chapel pulpit in his place, and giving more or less instruc-  
tion to the Senior class. He had a metaphysical cast of mind,  
and loved to discuss the philosophical principles that underlie  
theology. Socrates himself never delighted more in familiar  
conversations with his pupils and his friends on high moral and  
practical themes, and the Shelburne sage scarcely fell behind the  
Athenian philosopher in the skill with which he conducted the  
method of question and answer, beginning with " points nearly  
self-evident, and advancing step by step until in the result you  
must yield the point, or contradict your first admission." l At  
a period when there were few academies, and no theological  
seminaries, his house was at once an academy and a theological  
seminary. He fitted many for College, and instructed thirty-  
one students in theology, all of whom became preachers of the  
gospel. At the same time, he was a popular preacher. When-  
ever, on public occasions, such as " four days' meetings," as  
they were then called, he preached without a manuscript, then  
he illustrated the Saviour and the great salvation with wonder-  
ful clearness and force, and sometimes rose to a high pitch of  
argumentative yet fervid eloquence. He preached on one such  
occasion before the students and the people in the village  
church in Amherst, and the writer will never forget the winning  
and persuasive words with which he recommended the Great  
Physician to his hearers, all of whom he represented as sick  
 
1 Cf. letter of Rev. Thomas Shepard, D. D., in Sprague's Annals, which contains  
 
unto death with the fever, the leprosy, the plague of sin. Dr.  
Packard published five sermons, two of which were on the Di-  
named in the charter, and incorporated by the Legislature,  
in 1825. He continued a member of the Board twenty-nine  
years and resigned his place in 1854, at the last annual meeting  
at which President Hitchcock presided. . He was born in West  
Springfield, November 8, 1778. For several years he was a  
clerk, first in an apothecary's shop, in Springfield, and then in a  
commission store, in Hartford. Here he became a member of  
Dr. Strong's church, and at his suggestion, when he was twenty-  
one, with only fifteen dollars in his pocket, "all his earthly  
substance," he commenced fitting for College. Led by the  
pecuniary assistance which he could there receive, he entered  
the Junior class at the College of New Jersey (Princeton) in  
1802, and there graduated with honor in 1804, with such class-  
mates as Theodore Frelinghuysen, Samuel X. Southard, and  
Dr. N. S. Prime. Immediately after his graduation, he was  
elected Tutor in the College, which office he held for one year,  
at the same time pursuing theological studies under the Pro-  
fessor of Divinity. After studying four months more with  
Dr. Lathrop, of West Springfield, he was licensed to preach  
February 12, 1806, by the Hampshire Association, and on  
the 17th day of December, in the same year, he was ordained  
pastor of the church in Monson. His salary was five hun-  
dred dollars. He preached twenty-one Sabbaths, before receiv-  
ing his call, and he continued pastor sixty years, although for  
twenty-four of these years he had a colleague, and for several  
years he was too aged and infirm to perform any ministerial ser-  
vice. For more than thirty years there was a constant series  
of revivals under his ministry. He was often called to attend  
councils and other public meetings, and often invited to preach  
at ordinations, and before benevolent societies. Nineteen of  
these sermons were printed. In 1834, he received the honorary  
degree of Doctor of Divinity from the College at which he was  
graduated. In 1840, he Avas elected a corporate member of the  
 
American Board of Foreign Missions, and continued to be a  
member till his death. " With the exception of only a few  
years he presided over the Board of Trustees of Monson Acad-  
emy, which office he filled with singular ability; and to his  
counsels and faithful and untiring labors this most valuable seat  
He was one of those men whom we always expected to see at  
our anniversaries, and other public occasions, and whose pres-  
ence and countenance always gave us new courage ; for we felt  
nignant type, he long graced the Commencement stage at Am-  
herst ; he adorned society and fostered learning still longer at  
Monson ; he lived to preach two sermons 3 on the fiftieth anni-  
versary of his settlement ; he lived ten years after that, still  
honored and belo-ved among his own people, a beautiful speci-  
men of a serene and happy old age, but he passed away sud-  
denly at length in the eighty-fourth year of his age, his funeral  
sermon being preached by his neighbor, friend and colleague in  
the Board of Trustees, Rev. Dr. Vaill of Palmer, on the 9th  
day of July, 1866.  
 
John Tappan, Esq., was a member of the Corporation twenty  
years, having been elected in 1834, and resigning his trust, at  
the same time with Dr. Ely, at the last annual meeting (in  
1854) at which Dr. Hitchcock presided. He was born in North-  
ampton, July 26, 1781, and w.as the sixth child, in a family of ten,  
all of whom lived honorably, and only one of whom died under  
seventy-four years of age. His father, Benjamin Tappan, was for  
many years a goldsmith, and then a merchant in Northampton ;  
and it was the boast of his children, that when all the mer-  
chants around him sold ardent spirits, he always refused to do  
so. Mr. John Tappan went to Boston, in October, 1799, and  
 
1 Funeral Sermon by Rev. Dr. Vaill. 2 " Reminiscences of Amherst College."  
 
became a clerk in the wholesale importing house of Small &  
Salisbury. In 1803 he became a partner in the firm, at the age  
sel struck an iceberg, and sunk with twenty-seven persons on  
board. The remainder of the passengers and crew succeeded  
in getting into the boats, and, after three days' exposure on the  
sea, met a homeward bound ship, which took them up, and  
brought them safely to land, more or less injured, however, by  
frost, exposure and fatigue. This narrow escape, with its at-  
tendant circumstances, made so strong an impression upon him,  
that it proved the means of a radical change in his religious char-  
acter and life. Leaving the old Federal Street Society, of which  
Rev."William E. Channing was the pastor, he became one of the  
founders of the Union Church in Essex Street, first under the  
care of Rev. Samuel Green, and afterwards of Rev. Nehemiah  
Adams, and thenceforth devoted his property, influence and life to  
the cause of evangelical religion and Christian benevolence. He  
was one of the founders, and for twenty-three years Treasurer  
of the Massachusetts Bible Society. For more than forty years  
he was either the Treasurer or the President of the American  
Tract Society of Boston. At the time of his death, he was the  
oldest corporate member of the American Board of Commis-  
sioners for Foreign Missions, in which he was also, for nearly  
thirty years, a member of the Prudential Committee. He was  
one of the original founders of the American Temperance Soci-  
ety. The shipwreck which gave a new direction to his whole  
life, was occasioned by the first mate being drunk on deck in  
command of the ship, and from that time he not only ab-  
stained from the use of intoxicating drinks himself, but did  
all in his power to promote temperance. When Mr. Cheever  
was to be tried for libel as the author of " Deacon Giles' Dis-  
tillery," Mr. Tappan contributed largely toward the cost of  
the defense. Like his friend, Dr. Hitchcock, he adhered to the  
principle and practice of total abstinence at times and places  
where they were unpopular, and courteously declined to taste  
intoxicating drinks when the great and the good almost uni-  
 
versally used them at public dinners during the anniversaries in  
London.  
 
His interest in the cause of temperance, was the occasion of  
his interest in Amherst College, and of his connection with it  
as a member of the Board of Trustees. In 1829, he offered a  
premium for the best essay on alcoholic and narcotic substances.  
The premium was awarded to an essay by Prof. Hitchcock,  
which was published under the direction of the American Tem-  
perance Society, in 1829, and in 1880 incorporated as one of the  
chapters of Prof. Hitchcock's book entitled " Dyspepsy Fore-  
stalled and Resisted." His agency in originating the Anti-  
veneriian Society in 1829-30, has been narrated in the history  
of that period.  
 
His generous gifts to the College at the inauguration of this  
Society were the beginning of a succession of donations which  
continued through all the darkest periods in the history of the  
College and ended only with the life of the benefactor. In  
1845, he came again to the relief of the Library and of the offi-  
cers and students, almost famishing for mental food, with a dona-  
tion of a thousand dollars. Again when the subscription was  
started for the new Library building and books, he was one of  
the most cheerful subscribers. Again and again did he contrib-  
ute to the zoological and other collections in sums varying from  
fifty dollars to five hundred. In short, for forty years he was  
one of the standing and unfailing resources of the College in  
every emergency. He rarely gave very large sums. But he  
seldom if ever failed to give something. And he gave with  
such readiness and cheerfulness, that it has often been remarked  
of him, he seemed not only to know and feel but to act as if he  
knew and felt that "it is more blessed to give than to -receive."  
His direct and indirect assistance to Dr. and Mrs. Hitchcock in  
their European tour enabled them to extend their travels and  
return without feeling the expense. In his declining years, he  
expressed his threefold interest in Amherst College, in the Chris-  
tian education of young men and in the memory of a beloved pas-  
tor, by endowing in the College the Samuel Green Professorship  
 
fusing to allow the name of the donor to be mentioned during  
his life. In his later years, he was greatly interested in the cir-  
culation of good books. Prayer for Colleges, Life of Knill, Life  
of John Vine Hall, Life of Havelock, Life of Frelinghuysen, His-  
tory of the American Board and I know not how many other  
books of the kind, he distributed gratuitously among the officers  
and students of Colleges, and cast them into all the fountains  
of influence.  
 
Nor were these public charities at the expense of his duty to  
needy and worthy objects nearer home. He was ever distribut-  
ing to the necessities of the poor. For almost fifty years, almost  
to the day of his death, he took pleasure in laying out money  
for the improvement and embellishment of his native place.  
And in his will, he remembered as he had always done during his  
life,*all who had any reasonable expectation or just claim to such  
remembrance. In short, justice and generosity joined hands in  
his character and life, and there have been few men who could  
so truly adopt the language of the ancient patriarch : " When  
the ear heard me, then it blessed me ; and when the eye saw  
me, it gave witness to me, because I delivered the poor that  
cried and the fatherless and him that had none to help him.  
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me,  
and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy." Mr. Tappan  
was naturally serious, reserved, almost severe. But in his last  
years, he became cheerful and playful as a child, while at the  
same time his senses and faculties were not in the least impaired.  
He had to remind nearly all his visitors that he was not deaf.  
And bent and bowed as he was by the infirmities of age the last  
few weeks of ninety years of age. Rev. Mr. Parsons, pastor of the  
Union Church, and Rev. Drs. Anderson, and Kirk all took part in  
the funeral services, and amid a large number who came to honor  
the memory of this distinguished Christian philanthropist, Prof.  
Snell very fitly represented the College of which he had been so  
frequent and so liberal a benefactor. His more celebrated broth-  
 
looked up to him as a father, and used to say, " to him I owe,  
under Providence, all I am and have been for this world."  
Arthur's income was for many years much larger than John's ;  
but when the former succumbed to the great financial pressure  
in 1837, the latter expressed his fraternal love as well as his  
tion sixteen years, from 1834 to 1850. He was born in Dorches-  
ter, April 29, 1784. He lost his father in early life, and soon  
after that event, was placed as an apprentice in the office of  
Manning & Loring, then among the most celebrated book-  
printers in Boston. At the expiration of his apprenticeship, he  
began business in State street, in connection with Joshua Belcher,  
and published a weekly periodical called The Emerald. This  
partnership was not of long continuance. Mr. Armstrong then  
set up a printing-office in Charlestown, and printed The Pan-  
oplist, a monthly periodical, devoted to foreign missions and  
evangelical religion, which was the forerunner of The Mission-  
ary Herald and The Spirit of the Pilgrims. In 1811, he removed  
to Boston, where he continued the publication of The Panoplist,  
and published large editions of many popular religious works.  
Among the larger works issued from his press, was Scott's Fam-  
ily Bible. Thus was laid the foundation of a career of well-  
earned prosperity and usefulness, which has seldom had a paral-  
lel in the history of Boston printers and booksellers. He retired  
a Representative in the Legislature, and was once chosen Sen-  
ator for the county of Suffolk. He was Lieutenant-Governor of  
Massachusetts, a number of years in the administrations of Levi  
Lincoln and John Davis, and was acting Governor ten months  
in the year 1835, Gov. Davis having been chosen Senator in  
Congress. The next year, 1836, he was elected Mayor of Bos-  
ton, but thereafter declined a re-election.  
 
Gov. Armstrong stood up firmly for Orthodoxy and evangel-  
 
were Unitarians, and was an officer and leader of the American  
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, and other similar  
Societies during all the later period of his life. He was for  
many years a deacon in the Old South Church, and Superin-  
tendent of their Sabbath School.  
 
On the 26th of March, 1850, he attended a business meeting  
of the Prudential Committee of the American Board in his usual  
health. Returning home about seven o'clock in the evening, he  
sat down in his parlor, and without a premonitory symptom, ex-  
pired. He was within one month of sixty-six years of age.  
 
Gov. Armstrong was a pretty faithful attendant at the meet-  
ings of the Trustees, and was placed on important committees  
in which his business experience and his acquaintance with af-  
fairs enabled him to render valuable service. His name stands  
nextTto that of President Humphrey, and with those of Messrs.  
Grennell, Banister and Calhoun, on the circular which, in 1839,  
was addressed to the public, appealing for pecuniary aid (the  
one hundred thousand dollar subscription.) He left a consider-  
able legacy to the College, subject, however, to the final disposal  
of his wife. He married the sister of the late Dr. William J.  
Walker, from whose munificence Amherst has recently received  
from 1836 to 1854. He was born in Middlefield, Mass., in Feb-  
ruary, 1778. He fitted for College at Windsor Hill, where  
Roger Sherman was his fellow-student; but his eyes failed him,  
and he was compelled to relinquish a public education. For  
twenty years he was a merchant in his native place. In 1834  
he removed to Amherst.  
 
He was several times Representative from Middlefield, in the  
General Court, and once a member of the Massachusetts Senate  
from Hampshire County. He was also a member of the Gov-  
ernor's Council. In 1812, he commanded for some months the  
militia in Boston, and thus acquired the title of General, by  
 
removal to Amherst., he continued a member till, after eighteen  
years of faithful service, his connection was dissolved by death.  
During nearty all these years, he was a member also of the Pru-  
dential Committee, and of building and other working commit-  
tees generally. Being a resident in town he was always present  
at the meetings and constantly charged with special duties and  
responsibilities in relation to the College. At the same time he  
was always ready to contribute liberally to its pecuniary neces-  
sities according to his means.  
 
Gen. Mack died September 6, 1854, aged seventy six. "He  
was a man of great decision of character and a devoted Chris-  
tian, liberal in his benefactions, and never shrank from any duty  
he could perform or pecuniary sacrifice he could make." 1  
 
The father of Gen. Mack " a truly Christian patriarch who  
left to his numerous descendants and to society the fragrant  
memory of a life of ninety-four years consecrated to piety and  
usefulness" was the subject of that well-known and highly in-  
structive tract, entitled " The Faithful Steward." No one could  
see him for once and converse with him on the most casual sub-  
ject without feeling that he was a genuine descendant and rep-  
resentative of the Pilgrim Fathers of New England. And  
those who knew him most intimately, knew that he was just  
what he seemed, a living impersonation of their characteristic  
virtues. Gen. Mack himself was the worthy son of that worthy  
sire.  
 
Hon. Alfred Dwight Foster was elected to a place among the  
Trustees of Amherst College at their annual meeting in 1837  
and resigned his seat at the annual meeting in 1852, having been  
a member of the Board fifteen years. He was born at Brook-  
field, July 26, 1800. His ancestors had been, for at least two  
generations, distinguished in the civil history of Massachusetts.  
His early education he pursued partly under his father's direc-  
tion in his native place, and partly in Leicester Academy. At  
the age of fifteen he entered Harvard University and was grad-  
uated with honor in 1819. Admitted to the bar in 1822, he  
 
pursuits. From that time till his death, he was almost con-  
stantly employed in places of public trust and responsibility.  
He was a member of the House of Representatives three years  
in succession, beginning with 1831, a member of the Governor's  
Council in 1842, and again in 1844 and 1845, and a Senator  
from Worcester County in 1848. At the same time he was ren-  
dering invaluable service to the State in those great charities,  
the Lunatic Hospital at Worcester and the Reform School in  
Westboro, of the former of which he was an original Trustee,  
and the Treasurer for fourteen years, and of the latter Chair-  
man of the Commissioners for erecting the buildings and organ-  
izing the Institution. For many years he was on the School  
Committee in Worcester, and he was one of the Trustees of  
Leicester Academy from 1833 till within a year or two of his  
death.  
 
In 1882, he united with the Central Church in Worcester,  
and when greater facilities for public worship were necessary,  
he gave his counsel and influence " his hand and purse and  
heart " to the enterprise of organizing and building up the  
Union Church and Society in that city. From his election to  
the Trusteeship in Amherst College, in 1837 till 1843, Mr. Foster  
was present at all the meetings of the Board, and the commit-  
tees on which he was placed show how much they relied on his  
wise counsels in perplexing questions and difficult emergencies.  
In 1844 he tendered his resignation, because he could not send  
his own sou to Amherst, and doubted the propriety of retaining  
his place under such circumstances. But the Trustees unani-  
mously requested him to withdraw his resignation, and he yielded  
to their solicitations. He stood by the College through its dark-  
est hours of embarrassment and depression, although his faith in  
the possibility of sustaining it, at one time, was so shaken that he  
suggested the expediency of changing it to an Academy. The  
writer gratefully remembers the delicacy and courtesy, as well  
as wisdom and prudence of Mr. Foster's intercourse with the  
Faculty, when as Chairman of the Committee of the Trustees he  
conferred with them touching their assumption of the pecuniary  
responsibilities of the College at the commencement of Dr.  
 
alludes to his " nice sense of propriety," testifies to his conscien-  
tious support of the College during its season of deepest depres-  
A. B. C. F. M., an officer of the American Antiquarian Society,  
and an active and valuable member of the Massachusetts Board  
of Education. He died August 10, 1872, in the midst of life  
and usefulness, greatly lamented, beloved and admired, as a rare  
example of an upright, philanthropic, public-spirited, cultivated,  
refined and accomplished Christian gentleman.  
 
Rev. John Nelson, D. D., was born in Hopkinton, in 1786.  
In 1798 he removed with his parents to Worcester, where, at  
the age of fifteen, he became a member of the First Church.  
In 1804. at the age of eighteen, he entered the Sophomore class  
in Williams College, where he graduated in 1807. In 1809-10,  
he was Tutor in the College at which he was educated. After  
spending a few months in theological study with his pastor, Dr.  
Austin of Worcester, he was licensed to preach, in March, 1811,  
and March 4, 1812, he was ordained pastor of the church in  
Leicester, where he was the immediate successor of Dr Moore.  
In 1843 he received the honorary degree of Doctor of Divinity,  
from his Alma Mater.  
 
Dr. Nelson was Trustee of Williams College seven years, be-  
tween 1826 and 1833, and of Amherst College nine years, be-  
tween 1839 and 1848. But his tastes have led him to withdraw  
from public life, and devote himself to his pastoral charge where  
his labors have been greatly blessed, and to Leicester Academy,  
of which, for many years, he was one of the chief pillars. He  
has had two colleagues, but has continued to write sermons and  
preach a part of the day most of the time. He has published  
several occasional sermons, not a few articles in the magazines  
and papers, a little volume called " Evening," a larger one with  
the title, " Gatherings from a Pastor's Drawer," and a semi-cen-  
tennial historical discourse. 1 He celebrated his golden wedding  
May 4, 1862, of which an interesting account, in a beautiful  
little volume, was given to the public. This worthy and vener-  
 
1 See Durfee's Biographical Annals of Williams College.  
 
able couple are still living, " in their happy home on Leicester  
Hill," (so he writes in a letter just received, December, 1871,)  
near the close of the sixtieth year of his ministry and of their  
married life, " not having changed, nor wished to change his  
place." l  
 
Rev. Prof. Bela Bates Edwards had the honor of being the  
first alumnus of Amherst College, who was chosen to be one of  
its Trustees. His life and character have been delineated by  
Prof. Park with such exhaustive fullness and faithfulness, and  
such loving sympathy, that our readers will scarcely desire any  
other biography. 2 The principal facts of his life may be briefly  
set down as follows : He was born at Southampton, Mass.,  
on the 4th of July, 1802; prepared for College at Hopkins  
Academy, Hadley, and with Father Hallock of Plainfield, en-  
tered Williams College in 1820, and having remained there one  
year followed President Moore to Amherst, where he graduated  
in 1824 ; was converted during his Junior year in College, but  
did not make a public profession till three years later; entered  
the Theological Seminary at Andover, in November, 1825 ; was  
Tutor in Amherst College from 1822 to 1828; was Assistant  
Secretary of the American Education Society at Andover, while  
at the same time, he completed his theological studies in the  
Seminary, from 1828 to 1830 ; held the same office in Boston,  
in connection with editorial and literary labors, from 1830 to  
1836 ; was licensed to preach by the Suffolk South Association,  
in 1831; was Professor first of Hebrew, and then of Biblical  
Literature, at Andover, from 1836 to 1852; received the degree  
of Doctor of Divinity from Dartmouth College in 1844 ; traveled  
for his health in the Southern States and in Europe from Octo-  
ber, 1845, till May, 1847 ; went to the South again in the au-  
tumn of 1851 ; and died at Athens, Ga., April 20, 1852, want-  
ing a few months of being fifty years of age.  
 
1 Dr. Nelson died on Wednesday, December 6, 1871, only a day or two after the  
above was written.  
 
2 The Life and Services of Prof. B. B. Edwards. A discourse delivered in the  
Chapel of Andover Theological Seminary, June 25, 1852, by Edwards A. Park.  
Published in the Bibliotheca Sacra for October, 1852, also in a pamphlet form.  
There is also a Life of Prof. Edwards in Sprague's Annals, with letters from Dr.  
 
I shall not review his early life and education, his contribu-  
tions to American literature or his services in the cause of bib-  
lical learning and theological education. I shall not dwell upon  
his highly cultivated mind or his elegant taste, his great learn-  
ing or his greater modesty, his truth-loving accuracy or his Taci-  
tus-like eloquence, the purity of his heart or the beauty of his  
life, or the rare combination of excellences, usually deemed in-  
compatible, that were reconciled and made real in his character.  
faithful and successful student. Among the best scholars in a  
class which has furnished three distinguished Professors and its  
full share of excellent men in other departments of useful labor,  
he exemplified his impartial devotion at once to literature, sci-  
ence and Christianity in the choice of his subjects at Commence-  
ment discoursing in an Oration at the close of his Junior year  
(assigned him in consequence of the small number in the Senior  
Class) on " The Decline of the Roman Empire in Connection  
with Christianity," and in a Philosophical Oration when he  
graduated, on " Originality of Mind as affected by the Study of  
Natural Philo'sophy." After three years' absence, he returned  
in 1827 to deliver a Master's Oration, the subject of which was  
" The Diffusion of Knowledge in New England." At the same  
time he entered on a tutorship which he h'eld for two years,  
discharging its duties with such diversified capabilities and such  
comprehensive wisdom as to elevate the moral and religious  
tone x not less than the standard of scholarship among the stu-  
dents. And from that time till his death, whoever else might  
ining committee, now to deliver an address, now to organize a  
society of alumni, now to preside over its meetings. Still more  
frequently was he consulted by letter or by committee ; and his  
advice, constantly asked and freely but modestly given, was a  
 
1 He was the Tutor to whom Mr. Abbott alludes in the tenth chapter of his Cor-  
 
guide and a support to the College in many of its most trying  
emergencies. The officers of the College also found in him a  
faithful friend and wise counselor, whether in their private la-  
bors and trials or in their public literary undertakings. Gladly  
would the Corporation and the Faculty have linked his life still  
more directly with that of the Institution. They solicited his  
services, at different times, both as a Professor and as President.  
But his heart and hands were too fully enlisted in another  
sphere of duty. All that he could give and do consistently with  
this paramount obligation, was cheerfully given, was heartily  
done. He became a Trustee. He attended punctually the  
Commencements and the meetings of the Board. He devoted  
himself with especial zeal and earnestness to the increase of the  
Library and the erection of a new Library building ; he subscribed  
freely, too freely for his means, to the Library fund ; he issued  
circulars and wrote letters in its behalf, till he could write no  
more his last, addressed to President Hitchcock, was never fin-  
volumes of translations, and thirty-one volumes of periodical lit-  
erature attest his industry, enterprise, learning and taste. "For  
twenty-three years he was employed in superintending our peri-  
odical literature, and with the aid of several associates, he has  
left thirty-one octavo volumes as the monuments of his enter-  
prise and industry in this onerous department. What man, living  
or dead, has ever expended so much labor upon our higher quar-  
terlies ? A labor, how severe ! and equally thankless." ] Two  
volumes of his smaller pieces, essays, sermons, addresses, etc.,  
have been edited by Prof. Park, with a memoir, and published  
since the death of Prof. Edwards. But these literary treasures,  
as beautiful in form as they are rich in matter, are poor in com-  
parison with the greater works in literature, in art, and in exegesis  
which he had projected, for which he had collected ample mate-  
rials, and which he would doubtless have executed if he had  
 
Jonathan Edwards among its descendants ; and it is not extrav-  
agant to say that he has shed a new and peculiar lustre on a  
ees of Amherst Academy who laid the foundations of Amherst  
College and managed its affairs from 1821 to 1825. As such his  
name appears on the list of those who asked to be incorporated  
as Trustees of the College. But because he was too rigid a  
Puritan to suit the taste of the opposition, or because he had, by  
his zeal and earnestness in behalf of the College, rendered him-  
self especially obnoxious to their displeasure, he, together with  
Nathaniel Smith, Esq., and Rev. Experience Porter, was ex-  
cluded by the Legislature from the Corporation, and three other  
names were substituted in their place. On the resignation of  
Rev. Francis Wayland, the Trustees turned the tables and  
elected Rev. John Fiske a member of the Board in his stead ;  
at Dartmouth College in 1791, studied Theology under the di-  
rection of Rev. Dr. Lyman' of Hatfield, and was licensed to  
preach and at the same time ordained as an evangelist at Had-  
ley, May 6, 1794. On the 26th of August, 1796, he was in-  
stalled pastor of the church in New Braintree, which relation he  
continued to sustain during the remainder of his life.  
 
He found the church at New Braintree in a very depressed  
state, and there were no additions to it during the first two years  
of his ministry. But from that time there were several added  
each year till 1809, when there commenced an interesting revi-  
val which continued between two and three years, and increased  
greatly both the moral and the numerical strength of the church.  
In 1818-19, another and still more powerful revival occurred,  
the result of which was an addition to the church of more than  
ninety persons of all ages and conditions. l There were several  
other interesting revivals during his ministry, by which and by  
the blessing of heaven on his wise and faithful labors the church  
 
was much enlarged, and the tone of Christian feeling and be-  
nevolent effort was greatly quickened and elevated.  
 
An earnest friend of education at home and abroad, he  
watched over the schools in the town with a sort of parental  
interest, often visiting them and doing all in his power to elevate  
the standard of qualification in the teachers. He was one of  
the earliest and warmest friends of Amherst College, and oppo-  
sition and persecution only bound him more closely to its inter-  
ests. When pecuniary embarrassments threatened its very ex-  
istence, he entered the field more than once as a voluntary  
agent for soliciting subscriptions. " Some of my earliest recol-  
lections," writes his daughter, "are of conversations between  
him arid other Trustees of Amherst Academy about the feasi-  
bility^of removing Williams College, which seemed to be dying,  
away off among the mountains. Many long talks lasting till  
past midnight were held in our little sitting-room by such men  
as Mr, Packard of Shelburne, Mr. Porter of Belchertown, Mr. N.  
Smith of Sunderland, Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Webster, Col. Graves  
and others. What can be done, was the question. My mother  
(a wise woman) used to sit by and say : ' Your plan is a good  
one it is a pretty air-castle. Where will you get the fifty  
thousand dollars to start with ? ' And to my childish mind, the  
sum seemed too enormous to hope for, although I had become  
intensely interested in the object. Several of the ministers  
agreed to give a hundred dollars apiece for a nucleus a sum  
that pinched the families of those who had but five hundred a  
3'ear, as I ivdl knoiv. Then they went to begging in earnest.  
My father often started on an exchange Friday morning and re-  
turned the next Tuesday night, making a circuit of thirty or  
forty miles, visiting the good and worthy in the churches, repre-  
senting the cause and getting subscriptions of five, ten, fifty and  
a hundred dollars. My father often said in the latter part of his  
life that if he ever did any good in the world, it was at Amherst.  
He lived to see it prosper, and attended every Commencement  
while he lived."  
 
Dr. Hitchcock says of him in his " Reminiscences," " Dr. Fiske  
 
stand by the Institution while passing through an exigency.  
For having once settled his course by the chart of duty and put  
his hand to the helm, none of the cross currents of popular fa-  
vor or popular frowns could change it by the smallest rhumb.  
No plea of conflicting duties or important business at home or of  
poor health, by which not a few men excuse themselves from  
meetings where unpleasant and trying responsibilities must be  
assumed, ever kept him away from the meetings of the Board.  
Amherst College never had a wiser counselor or a more consistent  
and devoted friend than Dr. John Fiske." It was, therefore, an  
honor due alike to his character, his attainments and his services  
until the 22d of June, 1853, when Mr. James T. Hyde was or-  
dained as his colleague. From that time he continued to preach  
occasionally but usually in the neighboring towns whose min-  
isters he was fond of visiting, till about the close of the sum-  
mer of 1854 when he performed his last service in the pulpit.  
During the next winter, he failed gradually. In March, he was  
taken suddenly ill with congestion of the lungs. A few hours  
before his death, he joined with his children and friends in sing-  
ing " Rock of Ages." He died on the 15th of March, 1855, in  
the eighty-fifth year of his age and the sixty-first of his ministry.  
His funeral sermon was preached by his friend and neighbor, Dr.  
Snell of North Brookfield.  
 
His successor in the pastoral office gives an attractive picture  
of Dr. Fiske when he was already more than fourscore years  
of age. "In person tall and well-proportioned, with large and  
regular features and but slightly bended form ; with eyes still  
bright and voice still strong and clear ; with slow but solid foot-  
step ; generally reading, writing, singing, or talking, when he was  
not riding or sleeping, he seemed when I first saw him, to be  
about as vigorous as he was venerable. With a serene and intel-  
ligent countenance, with mild and dignified manners, with an ac-  
tive and well-balanced mind discriminating in judgment, skill-  
ful in management ; cautious and yet determined in action in  
 
ested in the practical affairs of men and with as deep an insight  
into their character and motives, he made his presence to be felt  
by all around him, without even attempting to exert an influence  
or make an impression. . . . After a ministry of fifty-eight years  
and nearly five months among the same people, in a pleasant  
and retired home with a large family,  
 
' And that which should accompany old age,  
As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,'  
 
enjoying and being enjoyed by his friends to the end, praising  
God for his goodness, and feeling more deeply than he could ex-  
press his own unworthiness, he fell asleep in confident hope of  
the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ." 1  
 
1 Letter in Sprague's Annals, Vol. II., p. 368.  
 
