CHAPTER XII.  
 
RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF THE PERIOD. 1825-36.  
 
IT was in 1825, shortly after the grant of the charter, that  
the first measures were taken for the establishment of a separate  
College, that the existence of a church in that Seminary would  
tend in a high degree to promote the great object which its  
founders and benefactors had chiefly in view, viz., to advance  
the kingdom of Christ the Redeemer, by training many pious  
youth for the gospel ministry, several of the students also hav-  
ing expressed their desire to be formed into a church specially  
connected with the College, and the officers of the Faculty hav-  
ing signified their approbation of such a measure, the subject of  
founding a church was laid before the Trustees at their special  
meeting in April, 1825, by the President. The Trustees, there-  
fore, passed the following resolution, viz., that Rev. Heman  
Humphrey, D. D., Rev. Joshua Crosby, and Rev. James Taylor,  
be a committee to consider the expediency of establishing a  
College Church in this Institution, and to proceed to form one  
should they deem it expedient.  
 
" The above named committee assembled at Amherst on the  
7th of March, 1826, and after deliberation on the subject re-  
herst College on the principles of the Congregational platform,  
of such persons desiring it as should upon examination be  
judged by them to be entitled to the privileges of church mem-  
 
bership and should be able heartily to assent to the following  
articles of faith and covenant:  
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were written under  
his infallible guidance, and constitute the only perfect rule of  
faith and practice.  
 
" That the one God exists in three persons, Father, Son and  
Holy Ghost, the same in substance, equal in power and glory.  
 
" That God created all things for his own holy pleasure and  
honor, and directs all events according to Jhis own benevolent,  
eternal and immutable purposes.  
 
" That the first man was formed upright and holy, but by dis-  
ifest in the flesh, has opened a way for the restoration and sal-  
vation of all men on the condition of repentance towards God,  
and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.  
 
" That genuine repentance and sincere faith and all right af-  
fections proceed from the Holy Ghost, who, through the re-  
faith, will be saved only on account of Christ the Mediator and  
Redeemer, and will continue in holiness and enjoy the blessed-  
ness of heaven forever.  
 
"While all who die without repentance, will at the day of  
judgment be condemned for their own sins, and will remain in  
impenitence and justly suffer everlasting punishment.  
 
" We enter into solemn covenant with Jehovah and with this  
church.  
 
" To God our Creator, Redeemer and Sacrificer, we sacredly  
devote ourselves and ours without reserve and forever.  
 
" And we solemnly engage as partakers of the same hope and  
 
enjoy the fellowship of the Lord Jesus, watching, reproving,  
exhorting and comforting each other for mutual edification, and  
looking for that blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great  
God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us  
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto him-  
self, a peculiar people, zealous of good works." l  
 
Thirty-one persons, all students, and members of each of the  
four classes, were then " examined by the council, and having  
publicly assented to the preceding articles and covenant, after  
an appropriate address by Dr. Humphrey, were solemnly consti-  
tuted the ' Church of Christ in Amherst College.' The church  
was then commended in prayer to the covenanted blessings of  
the one God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost."  
 
The style of the church is worthy of notice. Although formed  
on the principles of the Congregational platform, it has never  
deemer and of the College upon the transactions of this solemn  
and interesting occasion. The Institution is now at length fully  
organized. The church is established, which, we trust, will never  
be moved, on whose ample records the names of unborn thou-  
sands will be enrolled, in answer to whose prayers, tens of thou-  
sands will be brought into the kingdom of Christ, and by the  
phrey, D. D., was chosen Moderator, and Reuben Tinker, Scribe,  
and at a meeting, July 7, regulations were adopted for the ad-  
mission of members, according to which all candidates, includ-  
 
number of the brethren as the church may determine, and all  
such examinations of candidates shall be in a meeting of the  
church, so that any member of the church may also have the op-  
portunity to propose any inquiry, and that the candidate may  
then and there give his assent to the confession of faith and  
covenant. It was not till the 26th of October, that any mem-  
bers other than students were admitted to the College church,  
when Mrs. Humphrey was received by letter from the church at  
Pittsfield, Professor and Mrs. Hitchcock from the church in Con-  
way, Prof. Fiske from Dartmouth College, and Professors Wor-  
cester and Abbott from the church in the Theological Seminary  
at Andover. At a meeting in November, the church resolved to  
meet for religious exercises once in two weeks, on Saturday even-  
ing, and that at each meeting some subject or question, selected  
by the Moderator, and announced at the previous meeting, should  
be discussed. How long this arrangement continued, does not  
appear from the records. As early as 1829, such meetings had  
ceased to be held regularly, although Saturday evening long  
continued to be the evening for special meetings of the College  
church, and of professors of religion in seasons of religious in-  
terest. And no member of the church, or professor of religion  
who ever attended one of these meetings, will ever forget the  
wise fatherly counsels and the tender brotherly expostulations  
and entreaties of Dr. Humphrey on such occasions.  
 
The church remained almost a year without a pastor, Dr.  
Humphrey acting meanwhile as permanent Moderator. In Feb-  
ruary, 1827, after careful consideration and conference with the  
Trustees by committees, the church, with the full approval of  
the Trustees and the Faculty, resolved that it was expedient to  
complete its organization by the election and installation of a  
pastor, and by a unanimous vote they chose Dr. Humphrey for  
their first pastor. The installation took place on the 28th of  
February, 1827, in connection with the dedication of the new-  
College chapel. The churches represented in the Council were  
the First, Second and Third churches in Amherst, and the  
churches in Hadley, Northampton, Sunderland, Enfield, New  
Braintree, Shelburne, North Brookfield and Springfield. In the  
 
Washburn of Ainherst ; the introductory prayer was offered by  
Dr. Woodbridge of Hadley ; the sermon, having particular refer-  
ence to the dedication of the chapel, was preached by Dr.  
Humphrey; the installing prayer was offered by Mr. Crosby of  
Enfield ; the charge to the pastor was given by Mr. Fiske of  
New Braintree; the fellowship of the churches was expressed  
by Mr. Snell of North Brookfield ; and the concluding prayer  
was offered by Mr. Chapin of South Amherst.  
 
The pulpit of the new chapel was occupied by the pastor  
every other Sabbath, and by the other clerical members of the  
Faculty in rotation on each alternate Sabbath ; and at their first  
meeting after the opening of the chapel, the Trustees appropri-  
ated two hundred dollars, that is, five dollars a Sabbath, as the  
compensation for this service. This appropriation was renewed  
at each annual meeting for fifteen or twenty years. The sum  
was at length doubled, and since that time ten dollars a Sabbath  
has been the remuneration for the supply of the College pulpit,  
or, as the Trustees would perhaps prefer to put it, their recog-  
nition of the service.  
 
The usual religious meetings of the week at this time, besides  
the public services of the Sabbath, were the religious lecture on  
Thursday evening, conducted by the President and the preach-  
ing Professors in rotation, the meetings of the several classes  
by themselves on Friday evening, the meetings of the church,  
and sometimes of all the professors of religion on Saturday  
evening, and the prayer -meeting for all the students, during the  
hour immediately preceding public worship Sabbath morning.  
 
It should also be noticed that it was in 1827 that the plan was  
introduced of a weekly Bible exercise in each of the classes.  
The historical parts of the Bible were assigned to the Fresh-  
man class, the prophetical parts to the Sophomores, the doc-  
trinal parts to the Juniors, and the Seniors studied the As-  
sembly's Catechism with the President. The instruction of  
the lower classes was so apportioned among the Professors and  
Tutors that the whole Faculty, with rare exceptions, took more  
or less part in these biblical exercises. And the Bible lesson,  
instead of being put on Monday morning as it often is in schools,  
was assigned to Thursday afternoon, for the express purpose of  
 
bringing it alongside of the Thursday evening lecture, and  
thus breaking up, if possible, the current of secular labors and  
their pastor, Dr Humphrey said : " Let it be our united and  
fervent prayer to God, brethren, that he will prepare us all for  
the contemplated solemnities, that he will enable me to be faith-  
ful as a spiritual guide and overseer, that he will pour out his  
Spirit upon the church so recently established in this Seminary,  
and make it the pillar and ground of the truth here, that its  
light may be seen and its example be felt by every member of  
College, that great additions may be made to it from every suc-  
cessive class of such as shall be saved, and that it may shine  
teaching and influence been consummated, when, doubtless in  
answer to prayer asked by the pastor and offered not only in  
the church and the College but by pious parents and the friends  
of sanctified learning in every part of the country, the Spirit  
was poured out in copious effusions, and the new pastor, the new  
church and the new chapel all received a fresh consecration ;  
scarcely were these various, ample and appropriate channels for  
the truth and the Spirit of God opened, when they were filled  
with Divine influences ; scarcely had they brought all their  
tithes into the storehouse when the windows of heaven were  
opened, and a blessing was poured down that there was scarcely  
room enough to receive it.  
 
The following narrative of this first revival under the pastor-  
ate and presidency of Dr. Humphrey, was communicated by him  
to the Christian public under date of May 15, 1827 :  
 
" As our spring term has just closed under circumstances of  
peculiar interest, we feel constrained by a sense of gratitude to  
declare what God has done for us and to acquaint the friends of  
Zion with the present religious state of this College. Four years  
 
from the presence of the Lord.' Since that time, although a  
majority of the students have always been professedly pious,  
seemed for a few days to be hovering over the Seminary ; but  
it soon disappeared. This year the last Thursday of February  
was observed in the usual manner as a day of fasting and prayer  
for the outpouring of God's Spirit upon Colleges. The follow-  
ing week our new chapel was dedicated, and a pastor was set  
over our infant church. Both these occasions were marked with  
uncommon interest and solemnity, and our hopes were a little  
revived, but they were not sustained by any apparent increase  
of right feeling. As the term advanced, some few, I believe,  
went up more than ' seven times' to look for the harbinger of a  
spiritual shower, before they could discover anything. At length,  
when many thought it too late for a revival, as vacation was so  
near, by the blessing of God upon some special efforts to rouse  
professors from their slumbers, they began to open their eyes  
and to tremble. This was not far from the middle of April.  
Searchings of heart soon became deep and distressing. Mairy  
were ready to give up hopes which they had cherished for years,  
and it was impossible for us long to doubt that a revival was be-  
gun in the church.  
 
" In the meantime, there was a noise and shaking among the  
dry bones. The impenitent began to be serious, to be alarmed,  
to ask, ' What shall we do to be saved ? ' and then to rejoice in  
hope. By the 20th of April, five or six in the Freshman class  
appeared to have a new song put into their mouths, and from  
that time the work advanced with surprising rapidity and power.  
Convictions were in general short, and, in many cases, extremely  
pungent. Of the thirty in College who perhaps gave some evi-  
dence of faith and repentance, and who are beginning to cherish  
hope, twenty at least are supposed to have experienced relief in  
 
arated at the close of the term, a religious service was appointed  
as the last exercise, and a very appropriate and impressive dis-  
course, was the revival of 1827. I was away from College on  
account of ill-health at the time it commenced. In my absence  
of three weeks, not out of town, I was visited by two of my  
classmates who came to talk with me in relation to my duty to be-  
come a Christian. And when I returned to College, the still-  
ness and seriousness pervading the whole Institution made every  
day seem like the Sabbath in its most strict observance. The  
meetings for prayer among the students, held by classes, or the  
occupants of entries, or other divisions, and the more general  
meetings conducted by the Faculty, were so frequent, solemn,  
earnest, and pervaded by the evident presence of God, that I could  
not but be strongly impressed. Two or three, or it may be four,  
of the forty in the class, (1828) did not seem to be much moved,  
all the rest were manifestly. I think it was not more than three  
weeks after my return to the class, before the close of the term.  
But the whole College was so influenced in that time that  
through the rest of the year it had an entirely different aspect  
from any time before. Our class, then Juniors, was very essen-  
tially changed in character. Two who had been decidedly skep-  
tical, Kidder and Winn, became decided and earnest Christians.  
Humphrey, the President's oldest son, had been altogether irre-  
ligious, wild and negligent of all study except in the rhetorical  
department and general literature. He became, for the rest of  
his College course, correct in his conduct, serious and earnest as  
a Christian, diligent and faithful as a student. The change as  
to interest in religious things, was also marked in other cases,  
such as Fuller, Hunt, 1 Lothrop 2 and Spotswood. 3 I think eleven  
 
of the class united with the College church or other churches  
as the result of this revival. Among them were some of the  
foremost men of the class.  
 
" Of the class before us, (1827) I suppose McClure * was the  
most remarkable instance of conversion, I mean publicly the  
most remarkable. Perhaps the conversion of Timothy D wight, 2  
really the first scholar of the class, may have been as interest-  
ing to those who knew him well. In the class after us, (1829)  
the most marked and externally wonderful change was in Henry  
Lyman who was afterwards the martyr missionary with Muuson  
killed by the Battas of Sumatra. Lyman had been one of the  
worst, of the boldest in wickedness, apparently defying the  
authority of God ; but when he came under the power of God's  
In the south entry of South College there were a number of  
our most godly young men, while the majority were impeni-  
tent. After mature deliberation, the former resolved to hold a  
daily prayer-meeting of one hour for the conversion of the un-  
converted in that entry. The meetings were sustained with  
vigor and strong faith, the Holy Spirit wrought powerfully in  
their midst, and only a few weeks passed away before every  
student in the south entry of the old South College was con-  
verted to Christ." 4  
 
" The students made frequent calls on each other to converse  
upon the greatest of all subjects, the welfare of souls, and usu-  
ally joined in prayer before they separated. The meetings of  
literary societies were turned to prayer-meetings, and frequently  
the instructors united with their classes in prayer in their reci-  
Union.  
 
2 Tutor and Missionary.  
 
8 Letter of Rev. A. Tobey, D. D., Class of '28. For Mr. Lyman's account of  
his own conversion and other incidents of this revival, see his journal and letters  
in the memoir by his sister, Miss Hannah Lyman, Principal of Vassar College.  
 
4 Rev. T. R. Cressey, Class of '28.  
 
past nine o'clock. At these meetings, as well as others, the im-  
penitent were warned and urged to accept the Savior by those  
who had formerly been their companions in sin. It was a deeply  
affecting scene to witness the love of Christ proclaimed from  
lips so lately addicted to profanity. Anxious meetings were  
held two evenings in a week, and there are few of the impeni-  
tent that have not attended them. Many of the subjects of  
this work have been those who were farthest from God and all  
good, not only unbelieving, but wild and reckless.  
 
" About nine-tenths of the Senior and Sophomore classes are  
now the hopeful subjects of renewing grace. The probable  
number of those who have indulged hopes, is about forty, in-  
cluding six or eight who had formerly professed religion but  
who now felt that they had been deceived. The most promi-  
nent characteristics of this revival have been great heart-search-  
ings among professing Christians, deep and frequent convictions  
of sin, and trembling hopes." *  
 
A very full and interesting narrative of this revival forms the  
principal part of one of the chapters in Prof. Abbott's " Corner-  
Stone." 2 From this and indeed from the recollections of other  
eye-witnesses, it appears that before the revival, irreligion, skep-  
ticism, open infidelity, blasphemy even, and ridicule of sacred  
things had become exceedingly bold. The year previous, some  
six or eight of the most bold, hardened and notorious enemies  
of religion, after trying in vain to break up meetings of the  
pious students by banded and brow-beating intrusions, resolved  
to have a meeting of their own from which every friend of reli-  
their duty and their sins upon their consideration, while they  
sat still, in respectful but heartless silence ; looking intently  
upon him with an expression of countenance which seemed to  
say, ' Here we all are, move us if you can.' And they con-  
 
1 Rev. William A. Hyde, Class of '29, from a narrative contributed by him at the  
time to the Religious Intelligencer at New Haven.  
 
2 Corner-Stone, p. 364. The letters of Mr. McClure, printed by Prof. Abbott, and  
 
quered. They went home unmoved. They continued to as-  
semble for several weeks, inviting the officers in succession to  
be present, and at last the few who remained conducted the  
meetings themselves, with burlesque sermons and mock prayers,  
and closed the series at last, as I have been informed, by bring-  
ing in an ignorant black man whose presence and assistance  
completed the victory they had gained over influences from  
above.  
 
" This year, (1827,) an attempt was made to repeat those  
transactions, but with a very different result. A Tutor l was  
invited to hold the meeting. A Hebrew Bible was waggishly  
placed on the stand. After opening the meeting with prayer,  
he entered into a defence of the Holy Scriptures from external  
and internal evidence which he maintained in the most convin-  
cing manner, and then on the strength of this authority, he  
urged its promises and denunciations upon them as sinners.  
The effect was very powerful. Several retired deeply impressed,  
and all were made more serious and better prepared to be influ-  
enced by the truth." After several days of anxious inquiry,  
under the wise guidance of the pastor the young man at whose  
room and by whose invitation the meeting was held, was led to  
the Savior and sat clothed and in his right mind at his feet.  
That young man was afterwards Rev. A. W. McClure, D. D.,  
the eloquent and able preacher, author, editor and secretary.  
The leader of the banded opposition the previous year also now  
became as bold and zealous in the advocacy of truth and piety  
as he had been of irreligion. This was Henry Lyman, the mis-  
sionary and martyr of Sumatra. " There were many other cases  
as marked and striking as these. Out of the whole number  
of those who had been irreligious at its commencement, about  
one-half professed to have given themselves up to God, but as to  
the talent and power of opposition, and open enmity the vice,  
the profaneness, the dissipation the revival took the whole,  
with one or tyvo exceptions, it took the whole. And when, a  
few weeks afterwards, the time arrived for those thus changed  
to make a public profession of religion, it was a striking specta-  
cle to see them standing in a crowd in the broad aisle of the  
 
College chapel, purified, sanctified, and in the presence of all  
their fellow-students renouncing sin and solemnly consecrating  
themselves to God. Some years have since elapsed, and they  
are in his service now. I have their names before me, and I do  
not know of one who does not continue faithful to his Master  
still."  
 
With the caution and prudence which Dr. Humphrey always  
carefully observed in such matters, the converts of this revival  
were not received immediately into the church, but were in-  
structed by the pastor somewhat like the catechumens in the  
early Christian church, and edified in the faith, hope and love of  
the gospel for several months before they made a public profes-  
sion of their attachment to the Lord Jesus. Hitherto the Fac-  
ulty and pious students of the College had united with the vil-  
lage church in the celebration of the Lord's Supper. On the  
19th of August, 1827, this sacrament was administered for the  
first time in the College chapel, and it was a eucharist indeed, a  
festival of thanksgiving and praise, made doubly joyful by the  
number and character of those who now for the first time par-  
ticipated in the feast. Twenty students, converts of the revival,  
from all the different classes, joined themselves to the church at  
this communion. One or two had joined earlier and others  
united with the church in College or elsewhere at subsequent  
communions. We have not space for the names, and some of  
them would be unknown to most of our readers. But to one  
who knows their subsequent history, it is delightful to look  
over the list and see, how all without exception have adorned  
their profession, how nearly all have been able and faithful min-  
isters of the gospel, while not a few have been distinguished as  
preachers, teachers and missionaries at home or in foreign lands.  
If the tree is known by its fruit, certainly this revival (and the  
same is true of many others that have succeeded it), was a good  
tree whose fruit enriched the College, refreshed the churches  
and was for the healing of the nations.  
 
The following extract illustrates how the converts began at  
once to co-operate with those who had prayed and labored for  
 
" Soon after I entered College, in 1825, I was walking on the  
road to Pelham, and on the plain east of East street, I saw a  
number of families of colored people. I inquired if they would  
like a meeting at one of their houses Sabbath afternoon. The  
proposal was welcomed, the meeting was holden, and from that  
time a meeting, with a Sabbath-school, was sustained during my  
College course. Henry Lyman, after his conversion, assisted me  
in these meetings. Sometimes there were as many as seventy  
or more colored people at those meetings. How much good was  
accomplished or what has become of the meetings or the colored  
people, I do not know." J That was the beginning of a mission-  
ary enterprise which, with occasional interruptions, has been  
ever since sustained by the students of Amherst College, and  
which under the fostering care chiefly of the ladies of the Col-  
lege church, has grown into the church and congregation that  
now worship in Zion chapel on the west side of the College  
grounds.  
 
The next year, viz., during the latter part of the spring term  
of 1828, another season of revival was enjoyed, " highly inter-  
esting," (in the language of the church record, which is in the  
handwriting of Prof. Fiske,) " although not so rapid or power-  
ful as that of 1827. There seemed to be less of self-scrutiny  
in the members of the church and professors of religion, and  
less of importunity in prayer. But the Holy Spirit manifestly  
descended, and it was supposed that about fourteen members of  
College experienced his regenerating influences."  
 
" There were two revivals during my College course " writes  
Rev. Asa Bullard " in 1827 and 1828. I think it was the lat-  
ter, and only a few weeks before the close of the term, that Dr.  
Humphrey was all ready one Saturday to start for his former  
home in Pittsfield, when some students called on him and told  
him there were signs of seriousness in the College. Dr. Hum-  
phrey turned out his horse and gave up his visit. At evening  
prayers he stopped the pious students and gave them a most  
solemn exhortation to earnest prayer and faithful labor for a re-  
vival. The Holy Spirit was evidently present. Sabbath day  
several were hopefully converted, and for a day or two conver-  
 
1 Rev. E. D. Eldredge, Class of '29.  
 
sions were constantly occurring; when all at once the work  
seemed to stop. Monday morning the President again stopped  
the pious students at prayers, and in the most solemn and deeply  
anxious manner, said : ' Something is wrong.' Never shall I  
forget that day, and many will probably remember while they  
live that ' Judgment-like Monday.' The students were gathered  
everywhere in little clusters, as solemn as if some great calamity  
had just fallen upon us. Soon the College was one great house  
of prayer. In every entry and from many a room could be heard  
the voice of the most earnest, agonizing supplication. From  
that hour the work went on. Those who were bowed down  
1828, " in preparation for the Lord's Supper to be .kept on the  
approaching Sabbath, July 6," " the pastor stated to the church  
that the furniture for the ordinance of the supper was a joint  
pline was brought before the church by the pastor at the in-  
stance of members of the church who "declared themselves  
much grieved by the deportment of brother , particu-  
larly his indulgence of anger and use of profane language."  
The discipline was conducted according to the method and  
spirit of the gospel, with faithful admonitions and much for-  
bearance on the part of the pastor and the church, to a success-  
ful issue. The offending brother made a written acknowledg-  
ment, expressing his sorrow and asking forgiveness, and "it  
being read in his presence, the church voted their acceptance  
of the same and their continuance of Christian charity and  
fellowship."  
 
On Sunday, July 13, " the first baptism in the church occur-  
red (in the case of the children of members) in the baptism of  
the infant son of Prof. Hitchcock, named Edward."  
 
At the celebration of the Lord's Supper, November 2, 1828,  
 
1829, " Mr. Ebenezer Strong Snell and Mrs. Sabra C. Snell were  
admitted by profession."  
 
In the course of the same year, we find records of the earli-  
est appointments of delegates to attend ecclesiastical councils  
with the pastor, viz., April 14, of Prof. Worcester for the dis-  
mission of Rev. Mr. Chapin at South Amherst ; in June, of Prof.  
Hitchcock, for his installation at Westhampton ; and October 4,  
of Prof. Hitchcock, for the ordaining of Mr. Elijah C. Bridg-  
man, missionary to China, at Belchertown. The ordination of  
Mr. Bridgman took place on the 6th of October, and President  
Humphrey preached the sermon.  
 
In the spring term of 1830, a friend of temperance, (after-  
wards ascertained to be Mr. John Tappan of Boston,) offered a  
premium of four hundred dollars for the best essays on the sub-  
ject of temperance to be delivered at the four ensuing Commence-  
ments, and to be awarded one hundred dollars each year by the  
then Senior, Junior, Sophomore and Freshman classes, on the  
condition of there being a universal agreement of the students to  
abstain from the use of wine, spirits and tobacco for the whole  
College course. The condition was not fully accepted by the  
students, that was more than could be expected of any Col-  
lege ; but the proposal led to the formation of the Antivenenian  
Society in August, 1830, on the basis of a pledge of total absti-  
nence from ardent spirits, wine, opium and tobacco, as articles  
of luxury or diet, which pledge was signed by all the officers  
and a large majority of the students. Essays were written and  
read, and liberal premiums were given, the first of which was  
awarded to Lewis Sabin of the Class of '31. So far from with-  
holding or reducing the sum originally offered, Mr. Tappan gave  
five hundred dollars to the College, which was made the occasion  
of collecting the three or four thousand dollars expended by Prof.  
Hovey in the purchase of books, the most important early addition  
to the College library. Thus originated the College Temperance  
Society, which still lives and embraces the larger part of the offi-  
cers and students in its membership, of which the President of  
the College has always been the President, and Professors Hitch-  
 
enough to reach across a good-sized lecture room, and growing  
larger every year, has been exhibited by the President, or the  
Secretary, or both together, to each successive class of Fresh-  
men soon after their entrance, and has received the signature of  
a majority, usually a large majority, of every class for more than  
forty years. We are not so credulous as to believe that this  
pledge has been faithfully kept by all the signers. But the  
greater part have kept it, and it has been a safeguard to many  
students, and a blessing to the College. 1  
 
This temperance movement, thus early originated, was a con-  
necting link chronologically, doubtless also in the chain of cause  
and effect, between the revivals of 1827 and 1828, and that of  
1831. Without the revivals of 1827 and 1828, the students  
certainly could not have been brought up to a stand in the cause  
of temperance so far in advance of the age. 2 And without the  
temperance reform in 1830, the revival in 1831 would probably  
which had preceded it, but it began earlier in the term than  
those of 1827 and 1828. The concert of prayer for Colleges,  
the last Thursday of February prepared the way for it. The  
sickness and sudden death of a member of the Senior class  
produced a deep and solemn impression. The seriousness be-  
gan in that class, and among its leading scholars, not a few  
of whom were then without hope in Christ. Deeply convinced  
of the vanity of the highest worldly good, and of the folly  
and criminality of an irreligious life, these leading men, one  
after another, renounced the world and consecrated themselves  
to the service of their Redeemer. Thus the influence spread  
silently and gradually through the class, and from the Senior  
 
May, seven, l and at that in August, nineteen members of Col-  
lege, twenty five in all, were gathered into the College church  
as the fruits of this rich harvest season. How many joined  
other churches, I do not know ; but according to the best of  
my recollection, between thirty and forty were reckoned as con-  
verts. Among those who joined the College church and began  
a new life at this time from the two upper classes, it may be  
proper to name, as known to the public, Jonathan Brace, Eben-  
ezer Burgess, Orlow M. Dorman, James Garvin, Chester Lord,  
Thatcher Thayer, Wellington H. Tyler and George Waters of  
the Class of '31, and Samuel Hopkins and Henry Morris of the  
Class of '32. The reader will pardon a personal allusion to the  
beloved brother whose name occurs in the above list. His  
work as an educator of young ladies was done, and well done,  
in less than a dozen years, and he is now, I trust, in heaven.  
He owed to Araherst College not only his education and his  
power to teach, but his new birth and Christian life. Early one  
morning he came to my room in the Academy where I was then  
teaching, full of sorrow for sin and anxiety for his soul. I con-  
versed and prayed with him, giving him the best counsel I could  
from my limited experience, and at the same time advising him to  
call on Dr. Humphrey and take counsel with him. But without  
waiting for him to do so, I went immediately to Dr. Humphrey and  
acquainted him with the facts. It was the first case of anxious  
inquiry, and the President was taken a little by surprise. It was,  
however, a glad surprise. He started up as if he had received some  
good news, which at the same time called for immediate action :  
he said, we must be up and doing. He sought an interview  
with the first inquirer, and my brother was soon rejoicing in  
hope, cheerful and joyful as a little child. The President, whose  
ear was always open to the first sound of " a going in the tops  
of the mulberry trees," now girded himself instantly for the  
battle, and summoned his colleagues also, and his younger  
brethren to buckle on their armor. Among the special means  
which were used for the furtherance of this good work, my mind  
 
the word of God and the way of salvation. Dr. Humphrey  
preached more frequently than any one else. The sinfulness of  
man and the sovereignty of God, the deceitfulness of the human  
heart, and the subtle devices of Satan, were among his favorite  
topics. And the word of God in his hands was quick and pow-  
erful, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the  
dividing asunder of soul and spirit. Prof. Hitchcock came next  
with his awakening, alarming and convincing " revival sermons "  
which he began to preach in revivals in Conway, and which he  
preached with increasing power to so many successive genera-  
tions of College students. Prof. Fiske preached less frequently,  
but with a clearness of statement, a discrimination of character  
and doctrine, and a cogency of argument which left no ground  
for the unbeliever or disbeliever to stand upon, for the impeni-  
tent sinner no place to hide his head. Never before, perhaps  
never since, have I heard preaching which made God appear so  
great and good, man so insignificant, so criminal, so inexcusable  
in his disobedience and neglect of so great salvation. Night  
after night the old " Rhetorical Room " was crowded with young  
men of all classes and characters, in every stage of religious  
and irreligious thought and feeling, listening with all the acute-  
ness of their cultivated minds, and all the warmth of their  
quickened emotions, listening, not a few of them, as for their  
lives to the preaching of the law of God, and the gospel of  
Christ. And morning after morning the hearts of the preach-  
ers and pious hearers were rejoiced by the good tidings of class-  
so writes a member of the Class of '31, who has been greatly  
useful both as a pastor and as a teacher, " when I say that  
during my ministry I have esteemed the revivals in which I  
have been allowed to take part, as pure and truly beneficial very  
much in proportion to their likeness to those which I witnessed  
in College, and if I have ever succeeded in conducting a revival  
 
of those who joined the church by profession in the summer  
term of 1831, close the record by speaking of them as " the  
fruits of the revival by which the church and College was  
blessed the last term, and for which it is hoped, that many  
churches will have occasion to be thankful."  
 
The village church was blessed with a revival of great power  
and interest the same year. Four members of the church, 1  
most of them officers had been praying for it many months  
previous, holding meetings for this express purpose at their  
houses in rotation attended by themselves alone till at length at  
their instance the pastor, Rev. Mr. Washburn, appointed an  
inquiry meeting, and to his surprise found it full of anxious  
inquirers. The pastor entered into the work with all his might,  
and there was a great ingathering. It was the last work the  
good man did ; when it was done, he was ripe for heaven and  
ready to depart. College students who were teachers in the  
village Sabbath-school, were greatly useful in promoting it, if  
not the means of its commencement, and among them Moody  
Harrington of the Class of '31 did a work which if he had never  
done anything else, would entitle him to a place among those  
who are wise and turn many to righteousness. None who heard  
him can forget the power and pathos with which he spoke once  
at the Sabbath-school concert, and how the whole crowded as-  
sembly were stirred to feeling and action as he pressed home  
upon them the question, " Why do we sit still ?" And he spoke  
wherever the students of Amherst College went wherever the  
alumni of Amherst were settled in the ministry, they labored to  
promote those revivals in the spirit which they had imbibed in  
similar scenes in their Alma and with the wisdom which they  
had learned from the instructions and example of their beloved  
teachers. " I have enjoyed nine or ten precious revivals in my  
 
1 Dea. Leland, Dea. Mack, Dea. Flagg and Mr. Lyman (father of Henry). Miss  
Hannah Lyman, of Vassar College, was one of the converts.  
 
2 Mr. Beecher is accustomed to speak of Mr. Harrington as almost his spiritual  
father to whom he owed more religiously, than to any other man in College. Mr.  
 
ministry, and they are the very brightest spots in my life."  
Thus writes an alumnus to whom I am indebted for some of the  
most valuable materials of the foregoing history. Scores, prob-  
ably hundreds of the alumni, could bear similar testimony.  
They learned to believe in revivals, to love them and to labor  
successfully in them, while they were members of College.  
 
In the five years beginning with 1827 and ending with 1831,  
there were three revivals. Three years now succeeded without  
what is technically called a revival, although more than once  
during the interval the church was revived, and during each of  
these years there were occasional conversions, and additions to  
the church by profession at almost every communion. At  
length in 1835 when no class remaining in College had wit-  
nessed one of these favored seasons, the Institution was again  
blessed by a special outpouring of the Spirit. An account of  
it was given to the public through the Boston Recorder by Prof.  
Hitchcock, the pastor, Dr. Humphrey, being absent in Europe  
for the benefit of his health. From this account we give some  
extracts.  
 
" At the commencement of the spring teem, it was evident  
that some Christians had begun to set their faces unto the Lord  
God to seek by prayer and supplication, with fasting and sack-  
cloth and ashes for a revival of religion. God had been rebuk-  
ing us repeatedly by removing on account of ill health and for  
other causes, one and another of the permanent officers of the  
Institution, and it became necessary for the President also to  
leave for a season on a voyage to Europe for the recovery of  
his exhausted energies. And Satan too seized upon this time  
of trial and violently attempted to revive his work. But  
although he adopted measures which, in this community, were  
emphatically new, such as disturbing religious meetings by fire-  
works, 1 he succeeded in enlisting but very few on his side ; and  
when the faithfnl execution of the laws had removed these from  
the Institution, the power of God's Spirit became decidedly man-  
 
1 Sometimes called the Gunpowder Plot. A train of powder laid under the back  
seat from door to door of the old Mathematical Room was exploded during a re-  
ligious meeting. The author of the plot was immediately detected and expelled.  
The meeting adjourned to another room, and was finished with increased solemnity.  
 
ifest, and the work went steadily forward to the very last day  
of the term, a period of six or eight weeks. The number of  
those who were destitute of a hope at the commencement, did  
not exceed fifty. Not less than one third of these professed to  
have yielded their hearts to God. But it was clear that the  
work was the most thorough among professed Christians, several  
of whom were brought under deep convictions, and yielded at  
length their hearts anew (some of them probably for the first  
time) to the Savior.  
 
" We have made it a rule not to interfere at such a season  
with the regular College exercises, except in an extreme case.  
We adhered to this rule in this instance, except some seasons  
devoted to fasting and prayer." Among other special means of  
which Prof. Hitchcock speaks as having proved useful, were  
" meetings of ten or twelve professing Christians, in which every  
individual was urged to express his feelings ;" " a number of  
individuals on a certain day visiting all the professors of religion,  
with the resolution not to leave them till they had solemnly  
promised to renew their consecration ;" or " for an officer during  
the day to visit all the members of a class, converse with them  
on the subject of personal religion, and affectionately invite them  
to a meeting which he would conduct in the evening."  
 
In conformity with their former practice, the Faculty, at  
the close of the term, entered the following resolve upon their  
records : " Whereas it has pleased God to visit us during the  
past term with a precious revival of religion, whereby many  
have been quickened and some hopefully converted, therefore  
resolved, that we desire to leave this record of the fact as a  
testimony of their deep indebtedness to that sovereign mercy  
of a covenant-keeping God, and of their obligation to labor with  
new courage and zeal in his service."  
 
A few extracts from the recollections of those who were  
1835. It was a precious season. To a certain little band of  
students, whose names I could perhaps give, it was especially  
welcome. Day after day and night after night, they had been  
 
praying, both together and apart, in secret places, for just such  
a blessing. In some instances they spent, perhaps unwisely, but  
with the best intentions, a large part of the night together in  
wrestling with God, and sometimes even weeping together, lest  
something should be in the way of the descent of the Spirit  
during that season. On one occasion, when the result seemed  
to human view in considerable doubt, they joined hands, and,  
upon their knees, at dead of night, in a room in the old North  
College, entered into a solemn covenant with God and with one  
another, each praying in his turn, that they would not, God  
helping them, give it up, but would plead and labor till the  
blessing came. And when the blessing came, and they found  
such men as Clark, 1 Peabody, Humphrey and Smith of my own  
class, and others in other classes, anxious and inquiring or re-  
Greenough, John Humphrey, William A. Peabody, G. P. Smith,  
Lycortas L. Brewer, Alexander H. Bullock, Thomas P. Green,  
L. A. Hayward, David S. Oliphant, Isaac Titcomb, Frederic  
Dickinson, and Daniel W. Poor, were received by profession.  
These are among the fruits of a most interesting revival of  
religion during the closing six weeks of the term."  
 
The following extract from a letter of Rev. W. H. Beaman  
of the Class of '37, will illustrate the feeling with which this  
and other similar seasons of religious interest are remembered  
to this day by great numbers of the alumni : " The mention  
of these seasons calls up many precious memories. That of  
the Salutatorian, and Tutor from '37 to '41. I have before me very interesting  
and instructing narratives of the conversion of Peabody and Humphrey, the former  
by Rev. Leander Thompson of the Class of '35, the latter by Rev. William Hunt-  
ting of the same class. The former was printed in the Boston Recorder soon after  
the death of Prof. Puabody in 1850. But I have not room for the narratives. In  
the Humphrey here mentioned, the reader will recognize Rev. John Humphrey, son  
 
hearts of Christians as well as others. Some who had been ex-  
emplary professors of religion gave up their hopes, and for days  
were in despair then the light entered, and they were advanced  
to a higher standard of living. How vividly I recall as if it were  
yesterday, the sound of prayer in the dormitories, recitation  
rooms and groves, the walks and talks of fellow-Christians, of  
Christians with their unconverted classmates and other fellow-  
students ! With what fresh interest were the Bible, Bunyan,  
Baxter and J. B. Taylor perused ! How sacred was the very air  
of College, and all its surroundings ! How we inhaled the very  
atmosphere of heaven and had foretastes of its blessedness ! "  
 
The reader can not but have remarked the difference between  
the converts in the different revivals of this period. Many of  
the converts in each and all of them were the most gifted and  
influential men in College. But in 1827, these gifted and influ-  
ential men, previous to their conversion, were, most of them,  
wild, wayward, negligent of study, some of them dissipated  
and violently opposed to religion. In 1835, on the contrary,  
and to a great extent in 1831, the prominent converts had pre-  
viously been studious, amiable, faithful, leading scholars and  
exemplary in their whole deportment. Yet all alike felt their  
need of a new heart and a new spirit. All alike believed that  
when they were converted, they began a higher and better life.  
They not only believed this at the time in the flush of excite-  
ment, but they continued to cherish the conviction ever after,,  
And they proved not only the sincerity of their conviction, but  
the reality of the change by their pure, holy, godly lives. Now  
is not the united testimony of such witnesses so various, so  
intelligent, so honest and capable is it not sufficient of itself  
to vindicate revivals and conversions from the contempt which  
many cast upon them who know nothing of them by their own  
observation and experience ? Does it not go far to demonstrate  
the doctrine which has always been held by the Faculty and the  
great majority of the students of Amherst College, that such  
revivals are the work of God and are among the richest blessings  
which the Institution has ever experienced ?  
 
