CHAPTER X.  
 
PRESIDENT HUMPHREY'S ADMINISTRATION FROM 1823 TO 1825  
STRUGGLE FOR THE CHARTER.  
 
PRESIDENT MOORE died in June, 1823. In July of the same  
year, Rev. Heraan Humphrey was chosen to the presidency.  
His ministry of ten years in Fairfield, Conn., had been eminently  
useful and successful. He had now been nearly six years pas-  
tor of the church in Pittsfield, Mass. His labors in both these  
places had been blessed with revivals of religion of great power.  
He was already recognized as a pioneer and leader in the cause  
of temperance. He was a zealous champion of orthodoxy, evan-  
gelical religion, Christian missions, and of all the distinctive  
principles of the founders of Amherst College. In recognition  
of his high standing as an able divine and an efficient pastor,  
he had just received the honorary degree of Doctor of Divinity  
from Middlebury College. Although a Berkshire pastor, and  
a Trustee of Williams College, he felt the force of the rea-  
sons for its removal, 1 and when that plan was defeated by the  
action of the Legislature, he could not but sympathize with the  
high purpose and auspicious beginning of the Institution at Am-  
herst. There were ample reasons for his appointment. What  
were the arguments for or against his acceptance ? He speaks  
of this as " the most trying crisis of his pastoral life."  
 
He was ardently attached to his people. They were equally  
Nelson, Secretary, Dr. Humphrey was appointed the member for Berkshire, of a  
committee to raise funds for the removal of Williams College and its establishment  
at Northampton.  
 
As pastor, he was eminently successful ; could he hope to be  
equally successful as President ? The Institution to which he  
was united, had no permanent foundation, except in the hearts  
and the prayers of its friends. Yet he could not look with in-  
difference on their efforts and sacrifices to promote a cause which  
lay so near his own heart. His parishioners smiled when they  
first heard of his invitation to Amherst ; when they learned that  
he was considering it, they remonstrated ; when he proposed a  
council of his brethren to aid him in deciding the question of  
duty, they declined to unite with him in calling it. He was  
obliged to call it without their co-operation or consent. The  
council advised him to accept the presidency. The congregation  
reluctantly consented, and the pastoral bond was dissolved.  
" Nothing now remained but to make arrangements for my re-  
moval, and to take those sad farewells which cost me more  
anguish of soul than anything in my long life, except the loss  
of children." 1  
 
On the 15th of October, 1823, Dr. Humphrey was inducted  
into the presidency. It marks a characteristic of the Institution,  
perhaps also of the age, that a sermon was preached on the oc-  
casion. The preacher was Rev. Richard Salter Storrs, of Brain-  
tree, Mass. " It was a discourse of scope, adaptation, eloquence  
and power ; in all respects of such engrossing interest, as to make  
it no easy task for the speaker who should come after him. The  
wise Sophomores entertained serious doubts whether the Presi-  
dent could sustain himself in his inaugural. But this feeling soon  
subsided, and we were relieved of all our sophomoric fears and  
anxieties, as the President elect with a master's hand, opened  
the great subject of education education physical, mental,  
and moral, holding his audience in unbroken stillness for per-  
haps an hour and a half. If we were captivated by the eloquent  
preacher, we were not less impressed with the teachings and  
philosophy of the man who was to guide our feet in the paths  
of literature, science, and heavenly wisdom. That discourse  
 
Cool and impartial criticism, after the lapse of almost half a  
century, can not but justify the admiration which President  
Humphrey's inaugural inspired in the minds of those who heard  
it. Perhaps nothing has ever proceeded from his pen which  
illustrates more perfectly, the strong common sense, the prac-  
tical wisdom, the sharp and clear Saxon style, the vigor of  
thought, fervor of passion and boldness, coupled sometimes with  
marvelous felicity of expression, and the healthy, hearty, robust  
tried and difficult field of labor are well drawn in the opening  
sentences. " It is a deeply afflictive and mysterious dispensa-  
tion of Providence which has so lately bereaved this infant  
Seminary of its head, and by which I am now brought with  
inexperienced and trembling steps to its threshold. If prayer  
offered to God without ceasing for Dr. Moore on his sick bed  
could have prolonged his invaluable life ; if professional assiduity  
could have warded off the fatal stroke ; or if agonized affection  
could have shielded him in her embrace, he had not died and  
ideas on physical education. " If you would see the son of  
your prayers and hopes blooming with health and rejoicing daily  
in the full and sparkling tide of youthful buoyancy, if you wish  
him to be strong and athletic, careless of fatigue ; if you would  
fit him for hard labor and safe exposure to winter and summer ;  
or if you would prepare him to sit down twelve hours in a day  
with Euclid, Enfield and Newton, and still preserve his health,  
you must lay the foundation accordingly, you must begin with  
him early, must teach him self-denial and gradually subject him  
to such hardships as will help to consolidate his frame and give  
increasing energ}*- to all his physical powers. His diet must be  
simple, his apparel must not be too warm, nor his bed too soft.  
 
1 The writer will be pardoned for adding, that he has a special and personal rea-  
son for an affectionate remembrance of this inaugural, since it was the reading of it  
 
As good soil is commonly so much cheaper and better for chil-  
dren than medicine, beware of too much restriction in the man-  
agement of your darling boy. Let him in choosing his play,  
follow the suggestions of nature. Be not discomposed at the  
sight of his sand hills in the road, his snow forts in February  
and his mud dams in April, nor when you chance to look out in  
the midst of an August shower and see him wading and sailing  
arid sporting along with the water-fowl. If you would make  
him hardy and fearless, let him go abroad as often as he pleases  
in his early boyhood and amuse himself by the hour together in  
smoothing and twirling the hoary locks of winter. Instead of  
keeping him shut up all day with a stove and graduating his  
sleeping room by Fahrenheit, let him face the keen edge of the  
nortli wind when the mercury is below cypher, and instead of  
or any of the apostles of muscular Christianity in our day.  
 
On the second division of his discourse, Mental Education, he  
says : " That then must obviously be the best system of mental  
education which does most to develop and strengthen the intel-  
lectual powers, and which pours into the mind the richest streams  
of science and literature. The object of teaching should never  
be to excuse the student from thinking and reasoning, but to  
learn him how to think and reason. You can never make your  
son or your pupil a scholar by drawing his diagrams, measuring  
his angles, finding out his equations and translating his Majora.  
No, he must do all these things for himself. It is his own appli-  
cation that is to give him distinction. It is climbing the hill of  
science by dint of effort and perseverance, and not being carried  
up on other men's shoulders."  
 
In this view, he proceeds to make some very judicious re-  
marks upon the possibility of excessive simplification of text-  
books, abridgment of processes, teaching by lectures, itinerant  
lecturing and other labor-saving expedients, while at the same  
time he justly appreciates and describes with glowing eloquence  
 
We can not withhold a sentence or two on the last division,  
Moral Education. " I do not merely say that this branch is in-  
dispensable, for in a sense it is everything. . . . Without the fear  
of God nothing can be secure for one moment. Without the  
control of moral and religious principles, education is a drawn  
and polished sword in the hands of a gigantic maniac. In his  
madness he may fall upon its point or bathe it in the blood of the  
innocent. . . . Every system of education should have reference  
to two worlds, but chiefly to the future, because the present is  
only the infancy of being, and the longest life bears no propor-  
tion to endless duration. . . . May a worm like one of us then  
aspire to the honor and happiness of guiding immortals to  
heaven? Who would exchange such a privilege for the dia-  
dems of all the Csesars?"  
 
The number of students at the time of Dr. Humphrey's ac-  
cession to the presidency was nineteen Seniors, twenty-nine  
Juniors, forty-one Sophomores, and thirty-seven Freshmen  
total, one hundred and twenty-six, of whom, we learn from  
the cover of the inaugural address, ninety-eight were hopefully  
pious. The Faculty, at the commencement of the new admin-  
istration, consisted of the same persons who were thus associated  
with President Moore, with the addition of Samuel M. Worces-  
ter as Tutor. On the catalogue of the next year, published in  
November, 1824, we find the name of Rev. Nathan W. Fiske in  
place of Joseph Estabrook, as Professor of the Latin and Greek  
Languages ; Samuel M. Worcester, Teacher of Languages and  
Librarian; and Jacob Abbott, Tutor all names familiar after-  
wards as Professors under the charter. The new President  
seems to have made no change in the studies of the Senior  
class, except that Locke disappears from the list and Vincent's  
Catechism is definitely announced for every Saturday a place  
which it continued to occupy through Dr. Humphrey's entire  
presidency. Instruction is also offered in the Hebrew, French  
and German Languages, to such as wish it, for a reasonable com-  
pensation. The President is still the sole teacher of the Senior  
class. He instructed them in Rhetoric, Logic, Natural Theology,  
the Evidences of Christianity, Intellectual and Moral Philoso-  
 
declamations in the chapel, and criticised the compositions of  
one or more of the classes. He preached on the Sabbath, occa-  
sionally, in the village church, so long as the students worshiped  
there ; and when a separate organization was deemed advisable,  
he became the pastor of the College church and preached every  
Sabbath to the congregation. He also sustained (from the first,  
I believe,) a weekly religious lecture, on Thursday evening.  
He early drew up the first code of written and printed "Laws  
of the Collegiate Charity Institution," the original of which is  
still preserved in his own handwriting, and labored to introduce  
more perfect order and system into the still imperfectly organ-  
ized seminary. At the same time, he was compelled to take the  
lead in a perpetual struggle for raising funds and obtaining a  
charter.  
 
Under such circumstances, it is not surprising that Dr. Hum-  
phrey did not at once command the highest respect and venera-  
tion of the students in the chair of instruction. Accustomed  
to love and almost worship his predecessor, they very naturally  
drew comparisons to his disadvantage. Dr. Moore had been a  
teacher for the larger part of his life. Dr. Humphrey had no  
experience in the government or the instruction of a College.  
His strength at this time was in the pulpit and the pastoral office.  
The students also contrasted his plain manners, his distance and  
reserve, with the courtly air and winning address of his prede-  
cessor. Hence, while he enjoyed their respect as a man, their  
confidence as a Christian, and their admiration as an eloquent  
preacher ; as a teacher and a president he was not popular with  
his earlier classes. " We received some remarkable instruction,"  
writes a member of the first class that was taught by him and  
graduated under him ; " mainly concerning ethics and the eveiy-  
day aff.iirs of life, from President Humphrey. We were, how-  
ever, much less benefitted by his teachings than succeeding  
classes, for the reasons that he was not yet .experienced as a  
College lecturer, and that he was obliged to be often absent in  
soliciting aid for the Institution, and in struggling to extort a  
charter from a recusant Legislature. As a preacher and pastor  
we were well pleased with him. His character and deportment  
 
charity and sincerity were beautiful. His pulpit ministrations  
were, of course, specially valuable for those who subsequently  
became clergymen. Upon these young men he impressed the  
stamp of his own ministerial style so distinctly, that it was  
rarely obliterated by any succeeding influence of theological  
seminaries. Thus Dr. Humphrey has shone with a reflected  
light through an entire generation of zealous pastors and able  
preachers." l  
 
Influenced by the religious character and reputation of the  
College, pious parents who had wild and wayward sons, were  
already beginning to send them in considerable numbers to Am-  
herst, in the hope of their reformation. These young men, like  
the youthful Saul of Tarsus, very naturally felt themselves in  
duty bound, to recalcitrate against these very moral and Chris-  
tian influences, and were, perhaps, peculiarly ready to practice  
on the Faculty such pranks and jokes as are the especial delight  
of Sophomores in College. A joke of this kind perpetrated  
about this time upon Dr. Humphrey, has already taken its place  
as a classic among the most famous of College stories, and de-  
serves to be narrated here, not only as illustrative of his character  
and administration, but because it proved a turning-point in his  
reputation. Perhaps it should be told for another reason, also,  
viz : that it may be told correctly ; for I have before me, at least,  
half a dozen versions of the story, all from eye-witnesses, yet,  
like the testimony of the eye-witnesses to the event seen by Sir  
Walter Raleigh, from the window of his prison, no two of them  
alike in their details. The Doctor's recollection is more likely  
to be correct, than that of the students, and the story can not  
be better told than in his own words :  
 
" Two rooms in the old College had been thrown together  
for a temporary chapel, with a small, rough desk at one end, in  
which it was thought a good joke, I suppose, only to try ones  
metal, and see whether it would ring or not. Accordingly one  
morning as I came into prayers, I found the chair preoccupied  
by a goose. She looked rather shabby to be sure, nevertheless  
it was a veritable goose. Strange as it may seem, she did not  
salute me with so much as a hiss for my unceremonious intru-  
 
i Prof. C. U. Shepard, Class of '24.  
 
sion. It might be because I did not offer to take the chair.  
As anybody might venture to stand a few moments, even in  
such a presence, I carefully drew the chair up behind me as  
close as I safely could, went through the exercises, and the stu-  
dents retired in the usual orderly manner ; not more than two  
or three, I believe, having noticed anything uncommon. In the  
course of the day it was reported that as soon as they found out  
what had happened, they were highly excited and proposed  
calling a College meeting, to express their indignation that such  
an insult had been offered by one of their number. The hour  
of evening prayers came, and at the close of the usual exer-  
cises, I asked the young gentlemen to be seated a moment. I  
then stated what I had heard, and thanked them for the kind  
interest they had taken in the matter, told them it was just  
what I should expect from gentlemen of such high and honor-  
able feelings, but begged them not to give themselves the least  
trouble in the premises. ' You know,' I said, ' that the Trus-  
tees have just been here to organize a College Faculty. Their  
intention was to provide competent instructors in all the depart-  
ments, so as to meet the capacity of every student. But it  
seems that one student was overlooked, and I am sure they will  
be glad to learn that he has promptly supplied the deficiency,  
by choosing a goose for his tutor. Par noUle fratrum.' '  
 
The effect may well be imagined. It is thus told by one of  
the students : " As the boys went down the stairs after morning  
prayers, there was first the whisper, then the mirthful interro-  
gation, and then the loud shout. * Did you see the gander, the  
gander in the Old Prex's chair ? ' ' Hurrah for the gander ! '  
4 A gander for President ! ' Presidential stock which was not  
above par before, went down that morning to a very low  
figure.  
 
" But at evening prayers the tables were turned. The Presi-  
dent's 'Par nobile fratrum,' with its accompanying bow of  
dismissal, was instantly followed by a -round of applause. And  
such shouts of derision as the boys raised while they went down  
those three flights of stairs, crying, ' Who is brother to the  
 
up to a high figure, and never descended while I had any per-  
sonal acquaintance with Amherst College." l  
 
" As the students passed out of the chapel," writes another  
student, "there was a general inspection of outer garments,  
especially among a certain class of the students who were pre-  
disposed to fun and mischief, to see if feathers or at least down,  
might not betray the unlucky wight who had inducted the new  
respect and affections of the students, the necessity for a charter  
was growing more and more imperative, for one class after an-  
other was advancing towards the close of their curriculum, and  
finding that there was no prospect of their receiving a diploma,  
they grew dissatisfied, and it was with increasing difficulty that  
they were persuaded to continue and complete their course when  
there was so little chance that they would ever be able to receive  
a diploma. "We must now go back a little, and trace the efforts  
to obtain a charter from their beginning.  
 
The first application to the Legislature of Massachusetts for  
a charter was made in the winter session of 1823. The peti-  
tion of President Moore that the " Institution in Amherst for  
giving a classical education to pious young men, may be incor-  
porated," 3 was referred to a Joint Committee of the two Houses  
on the 17th and 18th of January. The friends of the College,  
including President Moore, appeared before the committee, and  
after presenting their claims for a charter, modestly asked or  
proposed that the question be referred to the next General  
Court, and the committee having 'agreed to report according  
to this request, they returned to Amherst not doubting that  
such a reference, almost always granted as a matter of cour-  
tesy, would as usual be granted to them. On the 25th of Jan-  
uary, the committee reported according to expectation, that the  
 
8 Such is the language of the journal of the Legislature. I have been unable to  
find a copy of the petition either printed or writteu.  
 
accepted, and the petition was unceremoniously rejected by both  
Houses, nearly all the members voting against it, including the  
representative from Amherst. 1  
 
Such uncourteous and unreasonable opposition only increased  
the number and zeal of the friends of the College. Nothing  
daunted, they resolved to renew their application for a charter  
at the very next session. Accordingly in June, 1823, a petition  
was presented by Rev. Dr. Moore, Hon. John Hooker and others  
of the Trustees of Amherst Academy, representing that the said  
Trustees had been intrusted with the funds of the Collegiate In-  
stitution at Amherst, stating the character and progress of the In-  
stitution, and requesting that they might be invested with such  
corporate powers as are usually given to the Trustees of Colleges.  
 
At the same session of the Legislature a memorial was pre-  
sented from the subscribers of the Charity Fund, representing  
that they had associated together for the purpose of founding  
an Institution on principles of charity and benevolence for the  
instruction of youth in all the branches of literature and science  
usually taught in Colleges, stating that they had committed the  
management of their fund to the Trustees of Amherst Acad-  
emy under whose direction the Institution had prospered beyond  
their most sanguine expectations, and praying that the request  
of said Trustees to be invested with corporate powers, might be  
granted. The petition and memorial were referred to a Joint  
Committee from both Houses of the Legislature. Of this com-  
mittee consisting of seven members, six agreed in a report in  
favor of the petitioners having leave to bring in a bill.  
 
In the remarks of Hon. Sherman Leland, chairman of this  
committee, in presenting this report to the Senate, it is stated,  
that the allegations of the petitioners have been substantially  
supported, that the Trustees of Amherst College have indeed  
received in trust, a subscription of a permanent fund of fifty  
 
1 An old feud between the East and West Parishes, originating in party politics  
and personal animosities, extended its influence to the College. The Amlierst  
representative in the winter session of 1823 was a member of the East Parish,  
and a "Democrat." The next two years the town was represented by a member  
of the West Parish, who voted for the charter. In this quarrel which has long  
 
thousand dollars of which forty-four thousand dollars has al-  
ready been secured by actual payment or by notes or bonds to  
the satisfaction of the Overseers ; that a new subscription has  
been commenced, payable on condition that thirty thousand dol-  
lars shall be subscribed, by the 28th of June, which, judging  
from the advanced state of the subscription, will unquestionably  
be done ; that after deducting a debt of about fifteen thousand  
dollars incurred for buildings, library and apparatus, the monied  
funds may be estimated at about sixty-five thousand dollars, and  
the buildings and other property at thirty thousand dollars,  
making the whole amount of property belonging to the Institu-  
tion ninety-five thousand dollars ; and that the income of these  
monied funds will pay the bills of a large number of pious and  
indigent young men, which income, together with the College'  
bills of others who are not charity students, and whose whole  
expense at Amherst need not exceed one hundred dollars a year,  
will be sufficient to support a competent number of able in-  
structors. On such a showing, the Trustees and donors and the  
friends of the Institution demand an act of incorporation not  
merely as a favor but as their right. In answer to the objection  
that if this College is chartered, its prosperity may injure the  
other Colleges of the State, Mr. Leland argues that there will  
always be a sufficient number of gentlemen of opulence who  
will choose to send their sons to Cambridge, while if students  
from the middling walks of life can be educated at Amherst at  
one-third the expense of an education at Cambridge, it will be  
so much clear gain to the Commonwealth ; and in regard to  
Williams College, it is sufficient to say that its numbers are not  
yet diminished, while the two Institutions now contain more  
Committee, without further discussion, the Senate voted on  
Monday, June 9th, to refer the consideration of the report to  
the next session of the same General Court, 1 and on Tuesday  
the 10th, the House of Representatives concurred with the  
 
1 At this time, the Massachusetts Legislature held two annual sessions, the sura-  
 
Senate in so referring it. Just fifteen days after, President  
Moore sickened, and, after an illness of only four days, died,  
his death being hastened, no doubt, if not caused by repeated  
disappointments and delays in the incorporation of the College,  
and his toils and cares now devolved on his successor.  
 
Both parties now made good use of the intervening time to  
prepare for the approaching conflict. The Trustees of Williams  
College prepared and presented a remonstrance against the in-  
corporation of Amherst as an encroachment on the territory, an  
invasion of the rights and injurious to the prosperity of the In-  
stitution under their care. No remonstrance came from Harvard,  
and the newspapers of that day remark upon the contrast to the  
disadvantage of Williams ; but the friends and supporters of.  
Harvard were for the most part unfriendly to the chartering of  
another College in the State, and used their influence against it  
as zealously, and for a time as effectually, as they had opposed  
the chartering of Queen's College in the same section in 1760.  
Brown University at this time had nearly a hundred students  
from Massachusetts ; and its patrons very naturally looked with  
a jealous eye upon the growth and prosperity of Amherst as  
prejudicial to their favorite Institution. l Local feeling carried  
not a few of the neighboring towns, and no small portion of the  
inhabitants of Amherst itself, in opposition to the College in the  
days of its early weakness. 2 And to complete the catalogue of  
opposing powers, last not least, the same theological prejudice and  
passion which opposed and for some time defeated the incorpora-  
tion of the Theological Seminary at Andover and of the Amer-  
ican Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions were now  
arrayed against Amherst College, and with the same result.  
 
To counteract so far as possible all these opposing influences,  
a committee of the Trustees prepared a statement which was  
 
1 " One of the most severe and satirical speeches against Amherst in the Legisla-  
ture, was spoken as a declamation at Brown, and heard with shouts of laughter by  
the students, to the no small amusement and gratification of the President and  
Professors." One of these Professors afterwards sent his son to Amherst, who, in  
 
widely circulated, both in the form of a pamphlet and through the  
newspaper press. It contains, among other documents, a cer-  
tificate of the Treasurer, John Leland, Jr., that (in addition to  
the sum of fifty thousand dollars previously subscribed for a  
permanent fund, and in addition to many generous donations in  
materials, work and money towards the erection of College  
buildings and a President's house) the proposed subscription of  
thirty thousand dollars, which was commenced the 28th of June,  
1822, was actually completed, according to the conditions, in one  
year from that date. It announces also, that since the last  
session of the Legislature, the venerable Dr. Moore has left to  
the Institution a residuary legacy which is valued at about  
five thousand dollars, and Mr. Adam Johnson has also bequeathed  
to it about five thousand dollars. It gives a table showing the  
distance of Amherst from other Colleges, and its central situa-  
tion in regard to Western Massachusetts, and especially in the  
old County of Hampshire, " which, according to the catalogues  
of 1823, furnishes one hundred and twenty-nine College stu-  
dents, only eight of whom are at Harvard, and nineteen at Wil-  
liams/' It also states that a mail-stage, running between Hart-  
ford, and Hanover, N. H., passes by the College every day of the  
week except Sunday, and another running between Boston and  
Albany, passes by the College four times a week, which regula-  
tion commenced the first of January instant, (1824.) From an  
examination of the catalogues for 1823 of Colleges in which  
New England students are educated, it is shown that out of five  
hundred and sixty-nine students furnished by Massachusetts,  
three hundred and six (a considerable majority) choose to go to  
other Institutions rather than Harvard or Williams, and that  
fifty-eight more go out of the State than come into it for an  
education, whereas one hundred and forty-eight more go into  
the State of Connecticut than go out of it, and while Rhode  
Island furnishes only forty-two students to other Colleges,  
Brown University in that State contains one hundred and fifty-  
four students, ninety-four of whom are from Massachusetts  
all of which, in the opinion of the committee, is a plain demon-  
stration that the honor, the interest and the public opinion of the  
State call for another incorporated College.  
 
On Wednesday, the 21st of January, 1824, according to the  
vote of reference passed at the summer session, the report of  
the Joint Committee in favor of granting a charter, came up in  
the Senate, and it was debated during the greater part of three  
days by twelve of the ablest members. The first day the char-  
ter was earnestly advocated by five senators, and as earnestly  
opposed by three. The second day, the friends of the charter  
had the field all to themselves, and three senators occupied with  
their arguments nearly the whole time usually given to debate.  
On the third day, the oppcsers rallied, and two senators spoke  
in opposition, and Hon. Mr. Leland, the chairman of the com-  
mittee, who had spoken also on each of the two preceding days,  
now concluded the argument in favor of an act of incorporation.  
The longest and one of the ablest speeches in behalf of the  
College, was made by Hon. Samuel Hubbard, 1 of Boston. He  
says that the objections against the charter, so far as he has  
learned, are four, all founded on local or petty considerations.  
1, That another College is not needed. 2, That Williams Col-  
lege will be injured. 3, That it is inexpedient to multiply Col-  
leges. 4, That the petitioners will ask for money. In answer  
to the first objection, he argues that there is a great want of  
men of education and piety and morals ; and that this want is  
felt by the good people of the Commonwealth, is proved by  
their voluntary contributions to the Institution at Amherst.  
" There is seldom an instance of a College being founded like  
this, by the voluntary contributions of thousands. Out of the  
fifty Colleges in England, there is not one but what was founded  
by an individual, except Christ College, in Oxford." In answer  
to the second objection, he points to the fact that the number of  
students at Williams College has increased from an average of  
sixty or seventy, to one hundred and eighteen, and that of Am-  
herst being one hundred and twenty-six, the two Institutions  
contain more than three times the previous average at Williams.  
In reply to the third objection, he insists, as many other sena-  
tors did, that small Colleges are better than large ones, and two  
 
preceding speakers had argued that granting the charter did not  
involve the necessity or the duty of giving money ; but Mr.  
Hubbard said, " What if it does ? Such grants do not impov-  
erish the State. The liberal grants which have been made to  
Harvard and Williams, are the highest honor of the State, and  
have redounded to the good of the people."  
 
Meeting boldly and on high ground the prejudice against Am-  
herst as an Orthodox Institution, Mr. Hubbard declares, that  
" all that is great and good in our land, sprung from Orthodoxy.  
The spirit of Orthodoxy animated the Pilgrims whom we de-  
herst represented not only the Orthodoxy, but the yeomanry of  
Massachusetts, and they must be prepared to give an account  
of their votes to the mass of the people. " If we refuse a char-  
ter," said Hon. Mr. Fiske, " how are we when we leave this hall,  
how are we to face the mass of population who are interested  
in this College ? They will say, ' you incorporate theatres, you  
incorporate hotels, you have incorporated a riding school. Are  
you more accommodating to such institutions than to those  
which are designed to promote the great interests of literature,  
science, and religion ? ' '  
 
" By refusing a charter," says Hon. Mr. Leland, " the great  
body of country citizens are wantonly deprived of the privilege  
of a College. Something more than the feelings of Orthodoxy  
will be awakened. The people will feel that there is a disposi-  
tion on the part of Government to maintain an aristocratic mo-  
nopoly. And rely upon it, your next election will bring persons  
here who will acknowledge the rights of the people."  
 
The vote was at length taken, on Friday, January 23d, and  
the question being on the acceptance of the report, giving leave  
House of Representatives, and debated with much earnestness  
on that and the three following days, and then postponed till  
the next week. On Tuesday, February 3d, it was resumed, and  
 
further discussed, and the question being taken, on concurring  
with the Senate, it was decided in the negative by a majority of  
nineteen votes out of one hundred and ninety-nine.  
 
" So," says the editor of the Boston Telegraph, (Gerard Hal-  
lock,) "the House declined to incorporate the College. Al-  
though the result is not such as the numerous friends of the  
College could have wished, it is certainly no discouraging cir-  
cumstance that so great a change has taken place in the views of  
the Legislature on the subject, and especially in the views of the  
community. Let the same spirit go on for a few months longer,  
and friends of the College resolved to renew the application and  
began at once the preparations for a third campaign. The first  
campaign document was an announcement of their intention to  
apply again to the Legislature for a charter, together with a  
concise statement of the reasons why such a petition ought to  
be granted. This document, signed by President Humphrey  
and bearing date, March 12, 1824, was published in more than  
thirty newspapers in all parts of the Commonwealth. And  
such was the sympathy manifested by the press, and such also,  
the increase in the number of students, that a conundrum, started  
by the G-reenfield Gazette, went the rounds of the newspapers :  
" Why are the friends of Amherst College, like the Hebrews in  
founders and proprietors which was signed by about four-fifths  
of the subscribers to the Chanty Fund. And these were further  
supported by more than thirty petitions from as many different  
towns, and signed by more than five hundred subscribers to other  
funds. In the Senate, the petition was promptly referred to a  
committee of three, to be joined by the House. In the House  
an attempt was made to prevent even a reference. But after  
considerable discussion, this was almost unanimously voted down,  
and a committee of four members was joined to that already ap-  
 
monstrance from Williams College, were referred to this Joint  
Committee.  
 
On Monday, May 31st, President Humphrey appeared before  
the Joint Committee, and, in the presence of a crowd of specta-  
tors, pleaded the cause of the petitioners in a speech which was  
as entertaining as it was unanswerable, and which Hon. Lewis  
Strong of Northampton, a competent and impartial judge, pro-  
nounced to be probably the ablest speech which was made in  
the State House during that session of that Legislature. On  
the following day, after an examination of witnesses, Homer  
Bartlett, Esq., of Williamstown, appeared on the part of the  
opposition and spoke against the incorporation, and was followed  
by Hon. Mr. Davis, Solicitor-General of the State, in an able  
and eloquent plea in favor of granting the charter. On Thurs-  
day, the committee reported that the petitioners have leave to  
bring in a bill. This report was brought before the Senate the  
same day, and accepted without any opposition. On Friday,  
the subject was taken up in the House, and after considerable  
debate, assigned to eleven o'clock on Tuesday of the ensuing  
week. Thus the consideration of the matter was put off to  
within five days of the close of the session. When it came up  
again on Tuesday, a desperate effort was made to secure first  
an indefinite postponement, and then a reference to the next  
session. Both these motions having been negatived by a large  
majority, the House adjourned to four o'clock P. M., when an  
animated and earnest discussion ensued, which continued till  
a late hour in the evening, and was resumed at nine o'clock  
the next morning. 1 " It was strenuously argued in opposi-  
tion, chiefly by members from Berkshire and our own neigh-  
borhood, that a third College was not wanted in Massachusetts;  
that according to our own showing, we had not funds to sustain  
Bradford Sumner, Esq., of Boston, who was, I believe, a partner of Judge Hub-  
bard, in the law. On the other side, Rev. Mr. Mason, of Northfield, a rum-selling  
and pugnacious Unitarian minister, read a speech an hour long, which was full of  
 
that many of the subscriptions had been obtained by false rep-  
resentations." 1  
 
Under the influence of such suggestions a resolution was  
brought forward to refer the report of the Joint Committee, and  
all the papers relating to the subject, to a committee of five  
members with power to send for persons and papers, to sit at  
such time and place as they should deem expedient, and to in-  
quire in substance, 1st, what reliable funds the Institution had ;  
2d, what means had been resorted to by the petitioners, or by  
persons acting in their behalf, to procure subscriptions, and 3d,  
what methods had been adopted to obtain students ; this com-  
mittee to report to the House at its next session. After a warm  
discussion which lasted for three days, and when nearly sixty  
of the members had already gone to their homes, on the 10th  
of June, 1824, this resolution was adopted by a vote of 109 to  
89, and the Committee of Investigation was appointed.  
 
The committee, nominated by the chair, " were all intelligent,  
fair-minded men, but not one of them sympathized with us in  
our well-known Orthodox religious opinions. This, we thought,  
might unintentionally on their part, operate against us. But in  
the end it proved for our advantage." 2  
 
It was confidently predicted by many that " this search-war-  
rant would settle the question against the College by showing  
that the pecuniary basis on which it rested was fictitious." But  
its friends kept up good courage. " The tide of public opinion,"  
they said 3 "has already begun to set strongly in our favor, and  
 
The Investigating Committee having given notice that they  
would meet at Boltwood's Hotel in Amherst on Monday the  
4th of October, that was to be the scene of the next act in the  
drama, and this part of the story can not be better told than in  
the language of Dr. Humphrey, who was the chief actor in it.  
 
"Our next business was to prepare for the investigation. We  
never claimed to have any endowment, except a subscription of  
fifty thousand dollars as a permanent fund to help educate pious  
young men for the ministry ; and although this was a bona fide  
subscription, a large part of which had been paid, it was not in  
the best condition to abide the searching inquisition of the Leg-  
islative Committee. As none of the subscribers were holden  
unless the sum was made up to fifty thousand dollars, several  
individuals were obliged, after all the papers were returned, to  
guarantee the deficiency, which amounted to about fifteen thou-  
sand dollars. This guarantee they made in good faith, but as  
they had already subscribed very liberally it was understood  
that they must be relieved as soon as other subscriptions could  
be obtained. Besides this it was known that some of the sub-  
scribers to the fund refused to pay, alleging that they were de-  
ceived by the agents who circulated the papers. It was deemed  
essential by the Trustees that the fifteen thousand dollars should  
be lifted from the shoulders of the warrantors before the com-  
mittee came upon the ground, and this was no easy task. The  
question was, where, after having turned every stone, we could  
look for so much money and in so short a time. At the request  
of the Trustees I went to Boston, laid the case before a select  
meeting of our friends, and in a few days obtained about half  
we might expect them. Two or three weeks before the time,  
an agent from Williams College called upon our Treasurer with  
an order from the chairman of the Investigating Committee  
to submit our subscription list to his inspection, and thus vir-  
tually to aid him in preparing for the prosecution ! The de-  
mand was referred by the Treasurer to our Prudential Commit-  
tee. Upon consultation they could not see by what right or  
authority our papers were thus prematurely demanded. They  
accordingly directed me to return substantially this answer :  
that we had been notified of the appointment of the Legislative  
 
1 Some of the old subscribers took pretty large shares in this new stock : Dr.  
 
Committee and their intention to come to Amherst and look  
into our condition, that we believed the committee had not au-  
thorized their chairman to demand any of our papers in advance  
of their meeting for any purpose, least of all for the purpose of  
inspection by one who was not a member of the committee, and  
that at the proper time and place all should be put into the  
committee's hands. Baffled in this application for the means of  
looking up our subscribers to testify against us, the agent was  
left to find them as best he could, and to do him justice, he was  
very successful, as appeared when he brought them personally,  
and by their affidavits, before the committee. The investiga-  
tion commenced on the 4th of October, 1824, and continued till  
the 19th. In their report the committee say that the Trustees  
appeared before them with counsel, and afforded every facility  
in investigating the affairs of the Institution, and discovered  
the utmost readiness to lay before them all the transactions of  
the Board and its agents ; and that three distinguished gentle-  
men appeared as counsel for the remonstrants against the peti-  
tion for a charter, and gave great aid to the committee in con-  
ducting the investigation. 1  
 
" Rarely has there been a more thorough and searching in-  
vestigation. All our books and papers were brought out and  
laid upon the table. Nothing was withheld. Every subscrip-  
tion, note and obligation was carefully examined, and hardly  
anything passed without being protested by the able counsel  
against us. Our principal agent in obtaining the subscriptions  
(Col. Graves) was present and closely questioned. A lawyer  
who had been employed to look up testimony against us, was  
there with the affidavits which he had industriously collected,  
and, at his request, a large number of subpoenas were sent out  
to bring in dissatisfied subscribers. The trial lasted a fortnight.  
The room was crowded from day to day with anxious listeners.  
 
1 Hon. W. W. Ellsworth, son-in-law of Noah Webster, afterwards Governor and  
then Chief Justice of Connecticut, aided by Messrs. Billings of Hatfield and Bolt-  
wood of Amherst, was the counsel for the Trustees. On the part of the remon-  
strants appeared Messrs. Dewey (afterwards Judge Dewey of Northampton,) Bartlett  
of Williamstown, Willard of Springfield, and Conkey of Amherst. The Investi-  
gating Committee consisted of Messrs. Phelps of Hadley, Sprague of Salem, Lin-  
coln of "Worcester, Webster of Boston and Smith of Milton.  
 
Were we to live or die ? Were we to have a charter, or to be  
forever shut out from the sisterhood of Colleges? That was  
the question, and it caused many sleepless nights in Amherst.  
Whatever might be the result, we cheerfully acknowledged that  
the committee had conducted the investigation with exemplary  
patience and perfect fairness. When the papers were all dis-  
posed of, the case was ably summed up by the counsel, and the  
committee adjourned.  
 
" Many incidents occurred in the progress of the investigation  
which kept up the interest, and some of which were very amus-  
ing, but I have room for only two. Among our subscriptions  
there was a very long list, amounting to several hundred dollars,  
of sums under one dollar, and not a few of these by females and  
children under age. On these, it was obvious at a glance, there  
might be very considerable loss. This advantage against us could  
not escape gentlemen so astute as our learned opponents. It  
was reported, and I believe it was true, that they sat up nearly  
all night drawing off names and figuring, so as to be ready for  
the morning. Getting an inkling of what they were about, three  
of our Trustees drew up an obligation, assuming the whole  
amount, whatever it might be, and had it in readiness to meet  
the expected report. 1 The morning came ; the session was  
opened ; the parties were present ; the gentlemen who had  
taken so much pains to astound the committee by their discov-  
ery were just about laying it on the table, when the obligation  
assuming the whole amount was laid on the table by one of the  
subscribers. I leave the reader to imagine the scene of disap-  
pointment on the one side and of suppressed cheering on the  
other. It turned out to be a fair money operation in our favor.  
 
" The other incident was still more amusing. When the notes  
came up to pass the ordeal of inquiry and protest, one of a  
hundred dollars was produced from a gentleman in Danvers.  
' Who is this Mr. P. ? ' demanded one of the lawyers. * Who  
knows anything about his responsibility.' ' Will you let me look  
at that note, sir?' said Mr. S. V. S. Wilder, one of our Trust-  
tees. After looking at it for a moment, taking a package of  
 
1 A copy of this obligation is still preserved. The names of the Trustees affixed  
are J. E. Trask, Nathaniel Smith and John Fiske.  
 
bank-bills from his pocket he said: 'Mr. Chairman, I will cash  
that note,' and laid down the money. It was not long before  
another note was protested in the same way. ' Let me look at  
it,' said Mr. Wilder. ' I will cash it sir,' and he laid another  
bank-bill upon the table. By-and-by a third note was objected  
to. ' I will cash it, sir,' said Mr. Wilder, and was handing over  
the money when the chairman interposed : ' Sir, we did not  
come here to raise money for Amherst College,' and declined  
receiving it. How long Mr. Wilder's package would have held  
out I do not know, but the scene produced a lively sensation all  
around the board, and very few protests were offered after-  
wards.  
 
" The appointment of this commission proved a real windfall  
to the Institution. It gave the Trustees opportunity publicly to  
vindicate themselves against the aspersions which had been in-  
dustriously cast upon them, and it constrained them to place the  
Charity Fund on a sure foundation. The investigation to be sure,  
cost us some time and trouble ; but it was worth more to us than  
a new subscription of ten thousand dollars." l  
 
In the progress of the investigation, the committee, at the re-  
quest of the opposing counsel, summoned a number of sub-  
scribers who refused to pay, to appear and give their reasons.  
Their excuse was that when they subscribed, they were assured  
by the agents that there was no doubt Williams College would  
be removed to Amherst, and as it was not removed, they did  
not consider themselves bound to pay. Affidavits to the same  
effect were also presented. The object of all this was to prove  
that subscriptions were obtained by false pretenses. To make  
the most of this argument, a pamphlet was immediately pre-  
pared and brought out for circulation, containing the testimony  
and affidavits before the committee, together with a number of  
letters from other subscribers who declined payment for the  
same or similar reasons. When the General Court met in Jan-  
 
tee. How it came there, every man was left to judge for him-  
self, in view of all the circumstances. It was never denied that  
the House, and the report of the Investigating Committee was  
presented and read. On the first subject referred to them, viz.,  
the amount of funds and the security on which they rest, the  
committee state that the funds of the Institution consist of vol-  
untary subscriptions and donations, principally for the fifty thou-  
sand dollar Charity Fund, and the thirty thousand dollar fund.  
Of the fifty thousand dollar subscription, they found about forty  
thousand dollars cash in hand, loans and notes well secured, some  
six or seven thousand dollars in College grounds or lands unsold,  
and nearly six thousand dollars still resting on the original sub-  
scriptions, most of which the subscribers are unable or refuse to  
pay. Of the thirty thousand dollar subscription they report over  
sixteen thousand dollars unpaid. But " this fund was payable in  
five equal annual installments, only two of which have yet fallen  
due. The amount of the liquidated debt of the Institution is  
subscriptions, the committee exonerate the Trustees and their  
agents of the charge of misrepresentation in regard to the re-  
moval of Williams College, and say: "There appears to have  
been nothing to show that the Trustees or persons employed in  
the government of the Institution have resorted to any improper  
or unusual means in obtaining subscriptions."  
 
On the third point, the committee are equally explicit in say-  
ing that they do not find that any unusual or improper measures  
have been adopted for obtaining students. 2  
 
1 This pamphlet is still in existence. It is lively and piquant reading, especially  
that part of it which relates to the subscriptions of women and children : " Two  
hundred and six females ! Mostly married women and infants. Many infants not  
females. Many of twelve and a-half cents, some ten cents ! one of two cents,  
all payable annually for five years ! "  
 
2 The enemies of President Moore charged him with exerting an undue and even  
 
In conclusion, the committee say : " The refusal of the Leg-  
islature to grant a College charter to Amherst will not, it is  
believed, prevent its progress. Whenever there is an opinion  
in the community that any portion of citizens are persecuted  
(whether this opinion is well or ill-grounded) the public sym-  
pathies are directed to them ; and instead of sinking under op-  
position they almost invariably flourish and gain new strength  
from opposition. Your committee are therefore of opinion that  
any further delay to the incorporation of Amherst Institution  
would very much increase the excitement which exists in the  
community on this subject, and have a tendency to interrupt  
perhaps admit of some doubt. Probably, however, it is a euphe-  
mistic way of saying that they feared the effect of further delay  
on party politics it might, perhaps, turn the scale against the  
party now with difficulty maintaining the ascendency therefore  
they recommended the incorporation of the Institution at Am-  
herst ! Not a very elevated reason for a simple act of justice to  
the College and the increasing number of intelligent and worthy  
citizens who were its friends ! But it was better to do it for a  
poor reason than not to do it at all, just as it was better to do it  
late than never. And it was high time for them to do it on  
political grounds if they would not for better reasons ; for it was  
fast becoming a political question and threatened to revolution-  
ize the politics of the State. Some of the friends of Amherst,  
after the refusal of their charter in the winter session of 1823,  
ignoring party distinctions, had voted for candidates known to  
members of the Senior class who came from Williams, they resent this charge  
against their lamented President with great indignation, and declare that " if he  
ever expressed apparently sincere regret for anything, it was when we asked dis-  
missions from that College. He remonstrated on the ground of injury to that Insti-  
tution, till we were half dissuaded from our purpose." The original of this petition  
is preserved and deserves to be framed and perpetuated, not so much in vindication  
 
scale against Harrison Gray Otis, the candidate of the former,  
and in favor of William T. Eustis, the candidate of the lat-  
ter for Governor. 1 On the same principle they secured the re-  
election of Gov. Eustis in 1824. The same process might ere  
long have changed the political complexion of the Legislature.  
 
After repeated consideration and adjournment, with protracted  
and earnest debate day after day in the House, the question of  
accepting the report of the committee and giving leave to bring  
in a bill was at length brought to a vote on the 28th of January,  
and the yeas and nays being ordered, it was decided in the affirm-  
ative by a vote of one hundred and fourteen to ninety-five.  
The next day, January 29th, the Senate concurred with the  
House. And on the 21st of February, 1825, the bill, having  
been variously amended, passed to be enacted in both branches  
of the Legislature, and having received the signature of the  
Lieutenant Governor, Marcus Morton, 2 on the same day, became  
a law. Thus, after a delay of three years and a half from the  
opening, and a struggle of more than two years from the time  
of the first petition, the Institution at Amherst received a charter  
ileges usually granted to the Trustees of such Institutions. Two  
or three provisions only are peculiar, and as such worthy of no-  
tice. The charter provides that the number of Trustees shall  
never be greater than seventeen, and that the five vacancies  
which shall first happen in the Board, shall be filled as they  
occur by the joint ballots of the Legislature in convention of  
both Houses ; and whenever any person so chosen by the Leg-  
islature shall cease to be a member of the corporation, his place  
shall be filled in like manner and so on forever. This provision,  
 
1 In 1822, Mr. Eustis, the candidate of the Republican party was. defeated by a  
majority of 7,125 votes ; in 1823 he was elected by a majority of 4,232 votes. Mr.  
Otii is said to have met Mr. Eustis soon after the election and remarked to him :  
" They say, Mr. Eustis, that you are becoming Orthodox lately." " I do not know  
how that is, your Excellency," replied Mr. Eustis, " at any rate, I believe in the  
doctrine of Election."  
 
2 Gov. Eustis died in office about two weeks previous. Lieutenant Governor  
 
quite unprecedented in the history of Massachusetts charters,  
was not in the bill, as first reported, but was introduced as an  
amendment in the course of the discussion. It was as illiberal  
as it was unprecedented. It should be remembered, however, to  
the credit of subsequent Legislatures, that they have usually  
appointed to such vacancies according to the nomination or the  
known wishes of the corporation, and in no instance filled them  
with persons obnoxious to the Faculty and friends of the Insti-  
tution.  
 
It is expressly provided in the last section of the charter, that  
the granting of it shall never be considered as any pledge on the  
part of government, that pecuniary aid shall hereafter be granted  
to the College. This provision was accepted by the friends  
of the College, perhaps suggested by them, in the hope of dis-  
arming or diminishing the opposition, knowing as they did, that  
whatever might be the provisions of the charter, each subse-  
of the Commonwealth may appoint and establish Overseers or  
Visitors of the College with all necessary powers for the better  
aid, preservation and government of it. This reserved right  
the Legislature has never yet seen fit to exercise.  
 
The seventh section reserves to the Legislature full power to  
unite Williams and Amherst Colleges into one University at  
Amherst, in case it should hereafter appear to the Legislature  
needful and expedient, provided also, that the President and  
Trustees of Williams College should agree so to do. This sec-  
tion of the charter was passed with considerable amendments  
and additions, as compared with the original bill. 1  
 
The petition for a charter was signed by the President and  
Secretary as directed at a meeting of the Trustees of Amherst  
Academy, and asked that they, the said Trustees, without nam-  
ing them, might be incorporated as Trustees of Amherst Col-  
lege. And the original bill, as reported in 1823 and summarily  
rejected by both Houses, granted incorporation to the Trustees  
 
1 The amendments and additions may be seen by comparing the two forms re-  
 
of the Academy according to the petition. A printed copy of  
a bill reported at some later stage of the proceedings (which  
has come into my hands,) omits three of these original Trustees,  
viz : Rufus Graves, Esq., Rufus Cowles, M. D., and Rev. Daniel  
A. Clark. The act of incorporation, as passed in 1825, strikes  
out the names of three more of the old Trustees, viz : Nathaniel  
Smith, Esq., Rev. Experience Porter, and Rev. John Fiske, and  
includes the names of eight new men, viz : Hon. William Gray,  
Hon. Marcus Morton, Rev. Joseph Lyman, D. D., Hon. Jonathan  
Leavitt, Rev. Alfred Ely, Hon. Lewis Strong, Rev. Francis Way-  
land, and Hon. Elihu Lyman. The reasons for all these changes  
are not definitely known to the writer, nor has he been able to  
ascertain from documents or from the Journals of the Legisla-  
ture, the precise time or manner in which it was effected. It  
will not be difficult, however, for the reader to divine the motive  
for the exclusion of the old Trustees when he observes that the  
persons excluded were among the active agents in the founding  
of the College, and as such, particularly obnoxious to its ene-  
mies. Those sections of the bill above mentioned, which differ  
from the charter, may be seen and compared with the charter  
itself, in the Appendix.  
 
The Trustees named in the charter, although they were not  
all of them the men who would have been chosen by the friends  
of the College as most deserving of the honor, were doubtless  
the best they could get from the Legislature, and were, on the  
whole, quite satisfactory to the Institution. Nine of the seven-  
teen had been Trustees of Amherst Academy, and so had had  
the management of the affairs of the Charity Institution pre-  
vious to the act of incorporation. The majority of the new  
Trustees continued to be members of the Board only a short  
time, and by their resignation gradually opened the way for the  
re-instating of some of the original members. One of them, and  
only one, Rev. Alfred Ely, stood by the College through its sub-  
sequent trials and struggles, and became indissolubly associated  
with- its history.  
 
It was a glad day for Amherst when the charter was secured.  
 
returned home with light hearts. The messenger who first  
brought the news, was taken from the stage and carried to the  
hotel by the citizens. The hotel, the College buildings and the  
houses of the citizens were illuminated ; and the village and the  
College alike were a scene of universal rejoicing.  
 
On the 13th of April, the Trustees under the charter held  
their first meeting in Amherst, organized the Board and ap-  
pointed the Faculty. The first annual meeting of the Board  
under the charter was held on the 22d of August, 1825, which  
was the Monday preceding Commencement. At this meeting  
a code of laws was established for the government of the Col-  
lege, 1 a system of by-laws adopted to regulate the proceedings  
of the Trustees and their officers, and the organization of the  
Faculty was changed by the establishment of new professor-  
ships and completed by the choice of additional Professors.  
The salary of the President was fixed at twelve hundred dol-  
lars with the usual perquisites. The salaries of the Professors as  
they were voted at the first meeting of the Board, varied from  
eight hundred dollars to six hundred dollars. At the annual  
meeting, those which had been voted at six hundred dollars  
were raised to seven hundred dollars. 2 Rev. Edward Hitchcock  
was chosen Professor of Chemistry and Natural History, with a  
salary of seven hundred dollars and the privilege of being ex-  
cused for one year from performing such duties of a Professor  
as he might be unable to perform " on account of his want of  
full health." Mr. Jacob Abbott was appointed Professor of  
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, with a salary of eight  
hundred dollars, " one hundred of which, however, are to be ap-  
propriated by him annually, with the advice of the other mem-  
bers of the Faculty, towards making repairs and additions to the  
philosophical apparatus." Mr. Ebenezer S. Snell was chosen  
Tutor in Mathematics with a salary of four hundred dollars.  
 
It was now voted to confer the degree of Bachelor of Arts  
 
1 These laws w-ere essentially the same which had been previously established for  
the government of the Charity Institution. They seem to have been drawn up by  
Dr. Humphrey, in whose handwriting the original copy still exists.  
 
2 At the annual meeting in 1827, it was voted that the Professors receive each a  
 
on " any young gentlemen who have previously received testi-  
monials of their College course in this College." The same  
degree was then voted to be conferred on twenty-two 1 young  
gentlemen of the Senior class who had been recommended by  
the Faculty. This class the Class of '25 was the first class  
that entered Freshmen and completed the course, and being the  
first to receive the degree of A. B., under the charter, were con-  
gratulated by the President on being " the first legitimate sons  
of the College." This raised in their minds the natural but  
rather funny question, " What was the legal status of preced-  
ing classes." They were, however, generous enough to allow  
that no stain rested on their predecessors. 2 But they were well  
come up with in this bantering. Some members of the previous  
classes, being present, said, "At the conclusion of our curric-  
ulum we all received testimonials that we were worthy of a di-  
ploma, which is more than ever was or ever can be said of some  
of you."  
 
The seal which was affixed to these diplomas, was procured  
by the President and Professors to whom that duty was assigned  
by the Trustees at their first meeting, and being approved and  
adopted by them at their first annual meeting, it has remained  
ever since the corporate seal of the College. The device is a  
sun and a Bible illuminating a globe by their united radiance,  
with the motto underneath : Terras Irradient. Around the  
whole run the words: SIGILL. COLL. AMHEEST. MASS. Nov.  
ANG. MDCCCXXV.  
 
This chapter containing the public history of the struggle for  
the charter, long as it is, would still be incomplete without an  
additional section, bringing to light some hidden and secret  
springs of action and influence. I have endeavored to do jus-  
tice in the foregoing pages to the Presidents who so nobly rep-  
resented the Institution in this trying emergency, to the Trust-  
ees and other friends, who, with their money, influence or per-  
sonal service, bravely defended it whenever and wherever it  
 
1 In 1850, the Trustees conferred the degree of A. B., on three others who had  
 
was assailed, and to the wise and good men, friends of justice,  
learning and religion, who in the face of opposition and obloquy  
eloquently advocated its cause before the committee and the  
two Houses of the Legislature. But honor to whom honor is  
due requires me to perpetuate the memory of one whose name  
does not appear either on the journals of the Legislature, or in  
the records of the College, of whom I find no mention in any  
printed or written document pertaining to the history of Am-  
herst during this period, who yet bore a part in these proceed-  
ings scarcely second to any other, who sat behind the scenes  
touching the springs of action and guiding the affairs to a suc-  
cessful issue during these three eventful years, and then went  
away to inaugurate other enterprises of a similar kind without  
waiting for any reward or any public appreciation of his ser-  
vices. I refer to Rev. Austin Dickinson.  
 
Born in Amherst, February 15, 1791, graduated with honor at  
Dartmouth in 1813, studying law for a time in the office of  
Samuel Fowler Dickinson, Esq., and then studying Theology at  
Princeton, and with Dr. Perkins of West Hartford, Conn., li-  
censed to preach by the North Association of Hartford County  
in 1819, traveling two or three years for his health in the south-  
western States, and, while thus traveling and recruiting, found-  
ing a Theological Seminary in Tennessee and a religious news-  
paper in Richmond, Va., Mr. Dickinson returned to his native  
place in June, 1822, just in season to start the subscription for  
thirty thousand dollars. He had been a boarder in the fam-  
ily of Prof. Moore, when he was a student of Dartmouth Col-  
lege. Now in the library of President Moore, he drew up the  
subscription paper which was to relieve the embarrassments of  
Amherst. With the help of his brother, Rev. Baxter Dickinson,  
and others, he soon raised three tnousand dollars in the town  
which had already contributed apparently to the full extent of  
its ability, and then took a leading part in obtaining subscriptions  
abroad, till, at the end of the year, in June, 1823, the subscrip-  
tion was completed. When it became necessary to raise another  
subscription of fifteen thousand dollars in order to relieve the  
guarantors and put the Charity Fund in such a condition that it  
 
to President Humphrey, Mr. Dickinson was still the principal  
agent. In short, for two or three years he was a beggar for  
the College, scarcely less persistent and indefatigable than Col.  
Graves had been before him. " When it became clear," I here  
use the words of Rev. Oman Eastman, secretary of the Ameri-  
can Tract Society, who was his townsman, kinsman and intimate  
friend, " When it became clear that the Federal party to which  
most of the best friends of Amherst College were allied, would  
never give the College a charter, he agitated the plan of chang-  
ing their votes to the Repiiblican party, and was the master spirit  
in the campaign which defeated the election of Harrison Gray  
Otis and secured the election of William T. Eustis for Governor,  
and Levi Lincoln for Lieutenant Governor in 1823. After their  
nomination, he visited Mr. Eustis and Mr. Lincoln, and was as-  
sured by them that if elected, they would give their influence  
in favor of the charter. He visited the Professors at Andover,  
and prominent ministers and influential laymen in different parts  
of the State to secure their co-operation. He wrote many let-  
ters to individuals and many stirring articles for the press ; in  
short, he was the efficient agent in touching the chords that vi-  
brated through the State and secured the desired result.  
 
"After the death of Dr. Moore, the most important thing for  
the College was to secure the right man for his successor. Mr.  
Dickinson's mind was fixed upon Dr. Humphrey. But there  
were great obstacles in the way of obtaining him. He was at  
Pittsfield, in the center of Berkshire County from which the  
strongest opposition to the College came. He was the pastor  
of a large and united church who were much attached to  
him. The prejudice against Amherst College was intense in  
many quarters. As an indication of public feeling, when the  
announcement of President Moore's death came to Andover, the  
late Rev. Prof. Gibbs said in the hearing of the writer, ' The  
question is whether they can get a successor ? ' Dr. Bacon re-  
sponded, ' The question is whether they ought to have a suc-  
cessor ? ' The writer replied with some warmth : ' Neither of  
these is any question at all there is no doubt that they can get a  
good man, and they ought to have the best man that can be  
 
" Mr. Dickinson went to Pittsfield and laid the matter before  
Dr. Humphrey, and probably had more influence than all other  
men in securing his acceptance of the presidency. Mr. Dickin-  
son was also instrumental in securing for the College, the ser-  
vices of Professors Fiske, Worcester and Abbott.  
 
" In the final appeal for the charter, Mr. Dickinson was ex-  
ceedingly useful in obtaining the right men for the committee,  
in securing the efficient advocacy of Judge Hubbard in the  
Senate and John Davis before the committee of the House, and  
in bringing a strong expression of public sentiment through the  
press to bear upon the final vote in the Legislature. He was,  
in the best sense of that now well-understood term, a ' lobby  
member ' of the Legislature, at the same time that he was the  
peared or rather withdrew from behind the scenes, and devoted  
himself first to the founding and publishing of the National  
Preacher, which for forty years placed the printed sermons of  
the ablest preachers in the United States within the reach of  
destitute churches and brought their influence to bear upon the  
Christian public, and subsequently inducing the secular news-  
papers, which were then closed against religious matter, to open  
their columns to religious intelligence, thus inaugurating one of  
the most remarkable and one of the most beneficent revolutions  
in the history of our newspaper press.  
 
Mr. Dickinson died in New York, on the 14th of August,  
1849, in the fifty-ninth year of his age. His body was brought  
to Amherst for interment ; and a monument erected to his mem-  
ory by his friends and the friends of the College, stands not far  
from that of President Moore in the cemetery. He was one of  
those rare men who love to do their work out of sight, but who  
there, far from the public gaze, lay broad and deep " the foun-  
dations of many generations."  
 
In further illustration and confirmation of what we have said  
of Mr. Dickinson, we subjoin the following letter of Prof. Ab-  
bott, who was a member of the Faculty when the charter was  
obtained. It was written November 2, 1871, and addressed to  
 
Rev. O. Eastman : " I remember Mr. Dickinson as in personal  
appearance the most grave and austere man I ever knew, with  
no thought and no word of interest for anything light or trifling,  
but wholly engrossed at all times in his deep-laid plans and  
schemes for the advancement of the College and to bring public  
opinion in Massachusetts up to the point of authorizing the Leg-  
islature to grant a charter. I think it was generally understood  
at Amherst, during the time that I was connected with the Col-  
lege and while the question of its legal establishment was pend-  
ing, that he was the main and indeed almost the sole reliance of  
its friends for all the plans formed and measures adopted to pro-  
mote the success of this undertaking. It was supposed, and I  
have no doubt, with truth, that the Trustees, who were generally  
men engaged in the active pursuits of life and consequently  
much occupied with their own affairs, were accustomed to look  
to him and to be guided by his judgment in respect to all the  
measures that were adopted, whether for raising funds, procur-  
nection of any kind with the College, and so quiet and unosten-  
tatious was his action in all these proceedings, and so entirely  
was his interest in the work confined to a desire to have it ac-  
complish, without any wish to secure to himself the honor or  
the consideration due to him who was the means of accomplish-  
ing it, that I am not at all surprised to learn that his name does  
not appear upon the College records of those days. And yet, I  
believe that every one who was conversant with the proceedings  
through which the College was established, would agree with  
me in saying, if some future generation should ever conceive  
the idea of erecting a statue to commemorate the founder of the  
College, the man most deserving the honor would be Austin  
Dickinson." l  
 
1 Since the text was written, Mr. Eastman has contributed a very interesting ar-  
ticle on the " Services of Rev. Austin Dickinson to Amherst College," to the col-  
umns of the Congregational Quarterly, April, 1872.  
 
