CHAPTER VII.  
 
THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AND OTHER FIRST THINGS DURING THE  
FIRST TWO YEARS.  
 
FIRST things, whether they are the first in the history of the  
world, or only the first in a country, or a town, or an institution,  
besides their intrinsic value, have a relative interest and impor-  
tance, which justify, and perhaps require the historian to dwell  
upon them at greater length.  
 
The first College edifice, as we have seen in the foregoing  
chapter, was the present South College. Although it was erected  
so rapidly and finished and furnished to so great an extent by  
voluntary contributions of labor and material, it was one of the  
best built, and is to this day one of the best preserved and most  
substantial of all the buildings on the grounds. The rooms  
were originally large, square, single rooms, without any bed-  
rooms, and served the double purpose of a dormitory and a  
study. A full quarter of a century elapsed before bed-rooms  
were placed in the South College. Some of these rooms, be-  
sides serving as sleeping-rooms and studies for their, occupants,  
were also of necessity, used for a time as recitation-rooms for  
the classes. Thus the room of Field and Snell, the two Seniors  
who for some time constituted the Senior class it was the room  
in the south-west corner of the fourth story was the Senior  
recitation-room, and there President Moore daily met and in-  
structed his first Senior class. Four chairs constituted the whole  
furniture and apparatus of this first recitation-room. The Col-  
lege library, which at this time was all contained in a single case  
 
old village " ineeting-house " which then occupied the site of the  
Observatory and Octagonal Cabinet, and was considered one of  
the best church edifices in Hampshire County. In the same  
venerable sanctuary, sitting for the most part in the broad gal-  
leries, the Faculty and students worshipped on the Sabbath with  
the people of the parish, and often admired and rejoiced, but  
oftener feared and trembled under the powerful preaching of the  
pastor, Rev. Daniel A. Clark. Pindar Field, a member of the  
first College class, was the founder and first superintendent of  
the first Sabbath-school in Amherst. And it may not be amiss to  
add here, although it is in anticipation of its proper place in pur  
history, that during the first ten or fifteen years, tutors in Col-  
lege were most frequently superintendents of the village Sab-  
bath-schools, and many of the teachers were College students.  
Tutors Burt, Worcester, Clark (Joseph S ,) Perkins, Tyler  
(W. S.,) and Burgess were all superintendents before 1835.  
Edwards A. Beach, of the Class of '24, was for a year or two,  
leader of the choir and teacher of music in the village church,  
and he tells us, that he " boarded round " among the good peo-  
ple for a part of his pay. The relations between the students  
and the families in the village were in the highest degree confi-  
dential and affectionate, and the letters which the author has  
received from the alumni of those halcyon days, although the  
mon the students to all their exercises till ere long one was pre-  
sented to the College. A coarse, clumsy, wooden tower or frame  
was erected between the College and the meeting-house to re-  
ceive this first College bell. This tower, then one of the most  
remarkable objects on College hill, became the butt of ridicule  
and was at length capsized by the students, and the bell was  
finally transferred to the new chapel.  
 
The growing popularity and prosperity of the Institution soon  
made it manifest that it would require more ample accommoda-  
tions. In the summer of 1822, the President's house l was com-  
pleted. About the same time a second College edifice was com-  
 
menced, and a subscription of thirty thousand dollars was opened  
to pay debts already contracted, to finish the new building and  
to defray other necessary expenses. At the opening of the  
second term of the second collegiate year hi the winter of  
1822-3, this edifice, the present North College, was already  
completed and occupied for the first time. The rooms were not  
all filled, however, and, for some time, unoccupied rooms were  
rented to students of the Academy. Still " no room was fur-  
nished with a carpet, only one with blinds, and not half a  
dozen were painted." Such is the testimony of an eye-witness, l  
who joined the College at this time.  
 
The two corner rooms in the south entry and fourth story of  
this new building, being left without any partition between  
themselves or between them and the adjoining entry, were now  
converted into a hall which served at once for a chapel and  
a lecture-room, where lectures on the physical sciences fol-  
lowed the morning and evening devotions, thus uniting learning  
and religion according to the original design of the Institution,  
but where the worship was sometimes disturbed by too free a  
mixture of acids and gases. The two middle rooms adjoin-  
ing this hall were also appropriated to public uses, one of  
them becoming the place where the library was now deposited,  
1, 1821, announces that "a College Library is begun, and now  
contains nearly seven hundred volumes. A philosophical appa-  
ratus is provided for, and it is expected will be procured the  
coming winter."  
 
The first lectures in chemistry were given by Col. Graves  
(who had been a lecturer in the same department previously, at  
Dartmouth College). These lectures were delivered in a pri-  
vate room used as a lecture-room in the old South College. It  
was quite an enlargement and sign of progress when Prof. Eaton  
began to lecture to all the classes together in the new hall in the  
new North College.  
 
1825, occurred at this time, and well illustrates the character  
of the officers and students, and their relations to one another.  
 
"Never could there be greater confidence between teacher  
and student. At the close of Prof. Eaton's first lecture, he  
said to President Moore, ' I must gather up my apparatus and  
tests, as you have no lock on the door to secure them.' ' Oh,  
no,' replied the President, ' no one will meddle with anything,  
I will be responsible.' The next morning the Doctor called on  
the President, exclaiming almost with an air of triumph, ' Well,  
Mr. President, your honest boys turn out as I expected.' ' Why,  
Prof. Eaton, have you lost anything from the table ? ' ' Yes,  
my phosphorus is gone. You put too much confidence in your  
boys. I never before left my apparatus so exposed.' At even-  
ing prayers, the President said, ' Young gentlemen, you. may be  
seated.' He then related what had passed between Prof. Eaton  
and himself, and declared his great disappointment at the result.  
' And now,' he said, ' we must put a lock upon that door, and  
every time you see that lock, you will be reminded of your poor  
depraved human nature.'  
 
" When we were dismissed, one of the students, drawing a bow  
at a venture, said to , ' Why did you take that phos-  
phorus ? ' ' Well, I wanted to experiment,' was the reluctant  
reply. ' But how do you know I took it ? it was but a little  
piece. But what would you do?' 'Do! I would go to the  
President's room and confess, immediately.' The young man  
was at the President's door almost as soon as he arrived there  
himself, suitable reparation was made, and the circumstance in  
legiate Institution, Amherst, Mass.," was issued in March, 1822,  
that is, about six months after the opening. It was a single  
sheet, about twelve by fourteen inches in size, and printed only  
on one side, like a hand-bill. In this, as in many other things,  
Amherst followed the example of Williams College, whose cata-  
logue, issued in 1795, according to Dr. Robbins, the antiquarian,  
 
printed on this catalogue, consisted of Rev. Zephaniah Swift  
Moore, D. D., President and Professor of Divinity; Rev. Gama-  
liel S. Olds, A. M., Professor of Mathematics and Natural Phi-  
losophy ; Joseph Estabrook, A. M., Professor of Languages and  
Librarian ; Rev. Jonas King, A. M., Professor of Oriental Liter-  
ature ; and Lucius Field, A. B., Tutor. But the Professor of  
Oriental Languages was never installed, and the instruction was  
all given by the President with two Professors and one Tutor.  
The President was not only the sole teacher of the Senior class,  
but gave instruction also to the Sophomores. The number of  
students had now increased from forty -seven to fifty-nine, viz. :  
three Seniors, six Juniors, nineteen Sophomores and thirty-one  
Freshmen. But dissatisfied with this hand-bill, they issued in  
the same month of the same year (March, 1822,) the same cat-  
alogue of names, in the form of a pamphlet of eight pages, which  
contained, besides the names of the Faculty and students, the re-  
quirements for admission to the Freshman class, an outline of the  
course of study, and a statement of the number of volumes in  
the libraries of the Institution and of the literary societies.  
This form was adopted by Williams College in October, 1822,  
to construe and parse Virgil, Cicero's Select Orations, Sallust, the  
Greek Testament, Dalzel's Collectanea Graeca Minora, a knowl-  
edge of the Latin and Greek Grammars, and Vulgar Arithmetic.  
 
COUKSE OF STUDY. First Year. Livy, five books, Adams'  
Roman Antiquities, Arithmetic, Webster's Philosophical and  
Practical Grammar, Graeca Majora, the historical parts, Day's  
Algebra, Morse's Geography, large abridgment, and Erving on  
Composition.  
 
Second Year. Playfair's Euclid, Horace, expurgated edition,  
Day's Mathematics, Parts II., III. and IV., Conic Sections and  
Spheric Geometry, Cicero de Officiis, de Senectute and de  
Amicitia, Graeca Majora, Jamieson's Rhetoric, and Hedge's  
Logic.  
 
Enfield's Philosophy, Cicero de Oratore, Tacitus, five books,  
Tytler's History, Paley's Evidences, Fluxions and Chemistry.  
 
Fourth Year. Stewart's Philosophy of Mind, Blair's Rhet-  
oric, Locke Abridged, Paley's Natural Theology, Anatomy, But-  
critical recitation in the Greek Testament. All the classes have  
weekly exercises in speaking and composition. Library belong-  
ing to the Institution, nine hundred volumes. Society libraries,  
Phelps, at Greenfield, in October, 1822, was a pamphlet of  
twelve pages, and in addition to the matter contained in that of  
the previous year, comprised the names of the Overseers of the  
Fund, a brief calendar and a statement of the term bills and  
other necessary expenses. The Overseers of the Fund, whose  
names appear on the catalogue, are Henry Gray, Esq., of Boston,  
Hon. Salem Towne, Jr., of Charleton, H. Wright Strong, Esq.,  
of Amherst, Rev. Samuel Osgood of Springfield, Rev. Theophi-  
lus Packard of Shelburne, Rev. Thomas Snell of Brookfield,  
and Rev. Luther Sheldon of Easton. The Faculty is the same  
as in the previous catalogue, except that the names of William  
S. Burt, A. B., and Elijah L. Coe, A. B., appear as Tutors.  
They were both graduates of Union College. The number of  
students had now increased to ninety-eight, viz : " Senior Soph-  
isters," five ; " Junior Sophisters," twenty-one ; Sophomores,  
thirty-two ; and Freshmen, forty. The students' rooms are also  
registered, N. standing for North College, and S.-for South Col-  
lege on the catalogue.  
 
The term bills, comprising tuition, room-rent, etc., are from  
ten to eleven dollars a term. Beneficiaries do not pay any term  
bills. Board is from one dollar to one dollar twenty-five cents  
a week. Wood is from one dollar fifty cents to two dollars a  
cord. Washing, from tw r elve to twenty cents a week. "Mo-  
 
in coming to Amherst. We all made our own fires and took the  
entire care of our rooms ; most of us sawed our own wood. My  
College course cost me eight hundred dollars, which was a me-  
dium average, I should think. The College grounds were rough  
and unadorned, and during all of my course had little done to im-  
prove them. Each spring we had our " chip day," when the  
students in mass turned out to scrape and clear up the grounds  
near the buildings."  
 
" The grounds," says another alumnus who entered the first  
Freshman class, 1 " were then in their natural state, without  
walks, or trees, or shrubbery. Of libraries, cabinets, etc., we  
had little but the name, and, in fact, hardly that. There were  
a few articles of philosophical and chemical apparatus, and only  
a few. 2 We had a regular course of lectures on Botany, and  
one on Chemistry. There were, I think, some lectures on Nat-  
ural Philosophy, and a few occasional lectures on other sub-  
jects."  
 
The two literary societies, the Alexandrian and the Athenian,  
were organized soon after the opening of the Institution. The  
members of College were all allotted to the two societies in  
alphabetical order, the two Seniors, Pindar Field and Ebenezer  
S. Snell, placing themselves or being placed at the head, the  
former of the Athenian and the latter of the Alexandrian So-  
ciety, and then reading off the names of the members of the  
lower classes alternately to the one or the other in the order of  
the catalogue. Mr. Field was chosen the first President of the  
Athenian Society, and Mr. Snell the first President of the Alex-  
andrian. The first meetings of the societies were held in No. 3  
and No. 6 in the north entry of South College. In April, 1822,  
the students in their poverty raised a small contribution, and  
sent Mr. Field to Hartford to purchase a few books which were  
the beginning of a library for the two societies, for they were  
then not rival but affiliated societies and had their library in  
Kendall of New Lebanon, N. Y., were nil that I saw for several weeks. I was my-  
self the bearer of those articles, and delivered them to Dr. Moore." Rev. E. A.  
Beach, Class of '24.  
 
common. "We felt proud of our library," writes Mr. Field,  
" when its books were duly arranged for the first time on the  
new shelves ; and it had cost less than a hundred dollars."  
 
" As my only classmate at this time was not a professor of  
religion," says Mr. Field, " the responsibility of forming a Theo-  
logical Society 1 was thrown upon me. In all our infant meas-  
ures, we mainly followed the example we had in Williams Col-  
the following graphic sketch of men and things at Amherst in  
those early days : " I remember that I was the youngest of my  
class. Most of my fellows were mature youths who did not  
appear to me youths at all, seniors in character and manlike in  
purpose, with an air which seemed to tell of years of yearning  
for the ministry, and of a brave struggle with the poverty which  
had kept them from their goal. They seized their late oppor-  
tunity with eagerness, they were in general patient, painstaking  
and earnest students.  
 
" The Institution was formed for just such pupils. Its primary  
object was to fit young men for a clerical career ; and one of its  
foremost recommendations was the cheapness of education and  
of living. For a dollar and a half a week we obtained fare,  
which, if I remember right, was substantial and wholesome.  
The farmers were glad of a home market for their productions,  
and their families made small charge for the preparation of our  
food, the Collegian then being a novelty in the village, and his  
society considered a pleasure. The orchards were far better  
than now ; the finest of peaches grew in abundance. The Col-  
lege grounds gave us all the chestnuts we wanted, and the  
hickory groves furnished boundless supplies of walnuts. If we  
craved other drink than that afforded by the unrivaled College  
well, we could go to the cider mills and fill our buckets. In the  
winter, too, there was shooting or other hunting, witness the  
hound of one of our early students, a grandson of Gen. Greene  
of Rhode Island. This animal, when game was scarce, ran  
wild himself, and was chased by his master, who on one such  
 
1 Afterwards called the Society of Inquiry.  
 
occasion, in pursuing him from house to house through the East  
street, bolted unceremoniously into the presence of the ven-  
erable Gen. Mattoon, with a breathless, ' Have you seen my  
dog ? ' In reply to which the stone-blind veteran thundered a  
military, ' No ! '  
 
"Amherst as it was then, would be a strange place to the  
residents in Amherst of nowadays. The good clergymen who  
petitioned for its prosperity in ' College prayers,' delighted to  
call it ' a city set upon a hill ; ' but they would have described  
its fashion with -quite as much exactness, had they put forward  
its claims to celestial notice as ' a village in the woods.' Some-  
thing more than a score of houses, widely separated from each  
other by prosperous farms, constituted Amherst centre. Along  
two roads running north and south, were scattered small farm-  
houses with here and there a cross-road, blacksmith's shop or  
school-house by way of suburb. The East street, however,  
had their features, whether tasteful or the reverse, greatly con-  
cealed by the wide prevalence of trees. Primal forests touched  
the rear of the College buildings ; they filled up with a sea of  
waving branches, the great interval between the village and  
Hadley ; towards the south, they prevailed gloriously, send-  
ing their green Avaves around the base and up the sides of  
Mt. Holyoke ; to the east, they overspread the Pelham slope ;  
and they fairly inundated vast tracts northward clear away to  
the lofty hills of Sunderland and Deerfield. It was a sublime  
deluge, which, alas ! has only too much subsided in our day.  
 
" With such surroundings, what now were our interior ad-  
vantages? Whatever we may have represented them to out-  
siders, whatever we may have persuaded ourselves concerning  
them, they were, in my day, extremely meagre. The teachers  
were few, and, in general, were not distinguished in their de-  
partments. Our library did not surpass the scholarly range of  
a country clergyman in fair circumstances. Apparatus and col-  
lections were unknown in our first year, and they had made but  
feeble beginnings before our graduation. The only lectures  
6  
 
which I remember were the two annual courses of Prof. Amos  
Eaton, in his day a distinguished botanist and geologist.  
 
" In Dr. Moore, a gentleman of suave manners, of true Chris-  
tian dignity and of singular judgment in managing youth, we  
had an admirable President. I venture to suspect that he was  
the only College President in the United States, who, from the  
beginning, personally subscribed for the somewhat expensive  
numbers of the Journal of the Royal Institution, of London.  
From this source and others similar, he appears to have gained  
a prevision of the importance of the modern sciences in educa-  
tion ; and to him mainly, are we indebted for the early foothold  
which they gained in the Institution ; to him, at all events, we  
owed the presence of Prof. Eaton. Rarely has College lecturer  
been more faithfully and enthusiastically listened to than Prof.  
Eaton, in his courses on Chemistry and Botany, together with  
his abridged course on Zoology. To supply the place of a text-  
book on the last mentioned branch, he furnished us a highly  
useful printed syllabus, drawn mainly from the great work of  
Cuvier, then wholly inaccessible to us. Prof. Eaton was such  
an educator as even now can seldom be found in Colleges. Full  
of information, acquainted with the broader generalizations of  
science, distinguished by a commanding and a fluent, clear, vig-  
and influence of President Humphrey towards the close of his  
College course, Prof. Shepard concludes : " Such were our chief  
advantages as I now recollect them. At the time we rated them  
highly ; few left Amherst for other Colleges. Nor do I know  
that any have since regretted connecting themselves with the  
infant Institution. There were doubtless deficiencies to be  
regretted. In the larger and older universities, we might have  
found better teachers and richer stores of libraries and collec-  
tions, but in some unknown way, perhaps in the enthusiasm  
of comparatively solitary effort, compensation was made ; and  
on the whole, we may doubt whether higher life success would  
have attended us, had we launched from other ports."  
 
tively free from exciting and distracting circumstances. There  
were then here no cattle-shows or horse-races, no menageries,  
circuses, or even concerts of music. They had no " Greek Let-  
ter " societies, no class day, and no class elections, and class pol-  
itics to divide and distract them. They came here to study,  
and they had nothing else to do. They felt that their advan-  
tages were inferior to those of older and richer Institutions, but  
for that very reason, they felt that they must make themselves.  
 
The " Exercises at the first Anniversary of the Collegiate  
Charity Institution at Amherst," were held in the old " Meet-  
ing-house " on the 28th of August, 1822. After sacred music  
and prayer by the President, a salutatory in Latin was pro-  
nounced by Ebenezer S. Snell. His classmate, Pindar Field,  
delivered the concluding oration in English. There was no  
valedictory. The members of the Junior class, then six in  
number, helped them to fill up the program with a colloquy,  
two dialogues, and several orations. A poem was also deliv-  
ered by Mr. Gerard H. Hallock who was then Principal of Am-  
herst Academy. As the Institution had no charter, and no au-  
thority to confer degrees, testimonials in Latin that they had  
honorably completed the usual College course, were given to two  
members of the Senior class. 1 The exercises were then closed  
with sacred music and prayer. The subjects of the two dia-  
logues were " Turkish Oppression," and " The Gospel carried  
to India." The last which was written by Pindar Field and  
acted by the two Seniors with the help of one of the Juniors,  
was an intentional argument and appeal in favor of Foreign and  
Domestic Missions.  
 
The first revival of religion occurred in the spring term of  
1823, about a year and a half after the opening of the Institu-  
tion. The number of students was now over a hundred. The  
President's house was completed. Two College edifices crowned  
the "Consecrated Eminence." And a subscription of thirty  
thousand dollars was being successfully and rapidly raised to de-  
fray the expenses. The external prosperity of the Institution  
exceeded the most sanguine hopes of its founders. But this was  
 
1 The third Senior, Ezra Fairchild, left before the close of the year in conse-  
quence of sickness in his family, and did not receive his Bachelor's degree till 1852.  
 
not enough. It was not for this purpose that they founded it.  
Material and even literary prosperity was in their estimation of  
little worth in comparison with religious growth and spiritual prog-  
ress. It was not enough that the students of the new Institution  
should be scholars. They desired also and above all things that  
they should be true Christians. In order to this they must, in  
the view of the founders, experience the regenerating and sanc-  
tifying influences of the Holy Spirit. And these they expected  
to see manifested ordinarily and chiefly in seasons of unusual re-  
ligious interest, which their fathers had called awakenings, and  
which they usually denominated revivals. Thus believing in  
revivals of religion as the gift of God and the work of the Holy  
Spirit, though not without the co-operation of human agency,  
the Faculty and Christian students of the Amherst Collegiate  
Institution, in common with the Trustees and other holy men  
who founded it, longed and labored and prayed from the begin-  
ning above all things else for the special presence of the Holy  
Spirit with convincing, converting and sanctifying power. And  
when in the spring of the second collegiate year personal relig-  
ion became the all-engrossing interest of nearly all the students,  
and before the close of the term the greater part of those who  
had hitherto lived without prayer and without God, began a new  
life, they rejoiced in it as the consummation of their hopes and  
the crowning benediction of Heaven on their plans and labors.  
 
The whole year and a half preceding had been a gradual  
preparation for this revival. " In our first year of College life,"  
says Mr. Field, " the pious members of the different classes en-  
joyed great familiarity with each other, and shared largely each  
other's confidence. We spent whole days in fasting and prayer  
frequently." Some of the students passed the winter vacation  
in towns in the vicinity where there was unusual religious inter-  
est and returned to College to breathe their own spirit of zeal  
and earnestness into their classmates and fellow -students. The  
annual concert of prayer for Colleges was held for the first  
time in February, 1823. This was observed in the Institution  
and was a day of deep and solemn interest. " President Moore's  
address to the students on this occasion was peculiarly appro-  
 
religion unmanly and prayer degrading, was like a nail driven  
by the Master of assemblies. ' Was Daniel ever more noble  
than when he prayed in defiance of King Darius' threats ? '  
The pious students were among the most important instruments  
in carrying forward the work. During a part of the time the  
President was in feeble health, and one of the few other in-  
structors was laid aside by sickness. In these circumstances  
one of the students with the permission of the Faculty, went  
to Connecticut to obtain the assistance of Rev. Dr. Beecher in  
promoting the revival. But being absent for similar service in  
Boston, his inability to come was turned to account by leading  
the pious students to a more full and prayerful reliance upon  
God. Abundant prayer was offered in College in various cir-  
cles, and also by many earnest friends of the College, and par-  
ents of unconverted students in many places. Several minis-  
ters from abroad came and held meetings in College, among  
whom were Rev. Experience Porter, Rev. Alexander Phenix,  
Rev. Joshua N. Danforth and Rev. Theophilus Packard. So  
extensive was the religious influence at the time that on one  
occasion all the impenitent students attended a meeting of in-  
quiry." *  
 
" They held early morning prayer-meetings, and would some-  
times even in study hours, go into each others' rooms and spend  
a few moments in prayer, often for an unconverted room-mate.  
At no time in the day perhaps could a person go into an entry  
and pass up to the fourth story without hearing the voice of  
prayer from some room. The work of God's grace seemed to  
go right through the College. Every mind seemed solemnized;  
and it extended rapidly. It soon became so pervading that all  
the irreligious, except one, were said to be under conviction.  
Prayer-meetings were held at nine o'clock in the evening in each  
 
and Coe were especially interested. Prof. Olds was sick, and  
Prof. King was in Greece. As a result of the revival twenty-  
three conversions were counted, leaving only thirteen without a  
personal faith and hope in Christ. During the revival we found  
the sympathy, kindness, advice and active service of President  
Moore of inestimable value, and, I think, he must have had his  
faith in the wisdom of his removal to Amherst strengthened by  
this early manifested blessing. I have a catalogue in which the  
names of the converts are marked as follows : Seniors, David O.  
Allen, Theophilus Packard ; Juniors, Bela B. Edwards, Austin  
Richards; Sophomores, J. M. C. Bartley, George Burt, John  
Kelley, A. J. Leavenworth, William Parsons, D. H. Stark-  
weather, Elijah D. Strong, Horatio Waldo, Joel Wyman ; Fresh-  
men, Fred. Bridgman, A. Chapin, Enoch Colby, Joseph Goff,  
a sermon at the close of the term and of the revival. Oh, how  
we wept as we listened ! " l This sermon, founded on Prov. 5 :  
12, 13, and entitled " Retrospection," was published at the re-  
quest of the students, with the following prefatory note : " The  
existence of a powerful and interesting revival of religion in  
Amherst Collegiate Institution gave occasion for the following  
sermon. It is yielded to the request of the members of that  
Institution for its publication, not on account of its literature or  
its theology, but in the humble hope that, by the blessing of God,  
light of another world. But some of them are sufficiently mani-  
fest. Besides the conversion of the larger part of the uncon-  
verted and nearly one-quarter of all the members of the Insti-  
tution, and the increased sanctification, Christian activity and  
usefulness of those who were before church members, it con-  
firmed the faith, hope and courage of the founders, and gave the  
Institution a direction and a character, which it has never lost.  
Frequent revivals of religion have ever since been a character-  
1 Manuscript letter of Dr. A. Chapin, Class of '26.  
 
istic of Amherst College. Such young men of superior talents  
and elevated scholarship as David O. Allen 1 and Bela B. Ed-  
wards were brought not only into the church and the ministry,  
but into the missionary work and the chair of theological instruc-  
tion, to both of which Amherst has ever since contributed an  
unusually large proportion of her sons. The influence extended  
to those who were not reckoned as converts. Thus Edward  
Jones, the colored student of the Class of '26, who was counted  
among the unconverted at the close of the revival, soon after  
his graduation went out as a missionary to Sierra Leone, and  
became one of the leading educators of that African State. A  
powerful revival existed in the Academy and the village church  
simultaneously with that in the College, whether as effect or  
cause, I do not know; probably it was in part both effect and  
cause of the religious interest in the Collegiate Institution.  
Finally this revival encouraged the hearts and strengthened the  
hands of the teachers and pupils and friends of the Institution,  
and thus prepared them to endure with more Christian fortitude,  
patience and faith the severe trial which was soon to come upon  
them, like an eclipse, nay, it seemed like a setting, of the sun at  
noonday.  
 
We have seen that President Moore was suffering from ill-  
health more or less of the time during the revival in the spring  
term. The amount of labor which he had been performing for  
nearly two years, together with the responsibility and anxiety  
that pressed upon him, was enough to break down the most vig-  
orous constitution. In addition to his appropriate duties as  
President and as Chairman of the Board of Trustees, he heard all  
the recitations of the Senior, and in part those of the Sophomore  
class, performed several journeys to Boston to promote the in-  
terests of the Institution, and solicited in a number of places  
pecuniary aid in its behalf. The revival, while it gladdened his  
heart beyond measure, greatly added to his labors and responsi-  
bilities. His constitution, naturally strong, was overtaxed by  
such accumulated labors and anxieties, and had begun to give  
 
1 Author of "India, Ancient and Modern." He was the first missionary among  
 
way perceptibly, before the attack of disease which terminated  
his life.  
 
On Wednesday, the 25th of June, he was seized with a bilious  
colic. From the first, the attack was violent, and excited fears  
of a fatal termination. "During his short sickness," we quote  
the language of a loving and beloved pupil, one of the converts  
in the recent revival, 1 "the College was literally a place of  
tears. Prayer was offered unto God unceasingly for him. We  
have never seen more heartfelt sorrow, than was depicted in the  
countenances of nearly a hundred young men, all of whom loved  
him as their own father. But while they were filled with anx-  
iety and grief, Dr. Moore was looking with calmness and joy  
upon the prospects which were opening before him. While  
flesh and heart were failing him, Christ was the strength of his  
heart arid the anchor of his soul. And when his voice failed  
and his eyes were closing in death, he could still whisper, 'GoD  
is my hope, my shield, and my exceeding great reward.' "  
 
He died on Monday, the 29th of June, 1823, in the fifty-  
third year of his age. The funeral solemnities were attended on  
the Wednesday following, in the presence of a great concourse  
of people from Amherst and the surrounding region. An appro-  
priate sermon was preached by Rev. Dr. Snell, of North Brook-  
field. As they returned from committing his remains to the  
ground, in the cemetery where they now rest beneath a monu-  
ment erected by the Trustees, the guardians and teachers, the  
students and friends of the Institution all felt for the moment  
that its hopes were buried in the grave of its first President ;  
for who could take his place arid carry on the work which he  
had so well begun, but which had proved too heavy a burden  
even for him to bear. So profound was the sympathy of the  
Senior class with their beloved President, that they were reluc-  
tant to take any part in Commencement Exercises at which he  
could not preside. And so dark, in their view, was the cloud  
which rested on the infant seminary, that, reduced almost to  
despair, they were on the point of closing their connection with  
it and graduating at some other Institution. Accordingly at the  
close of the funeral services, the class appeared before the Board  
 
1 Prof. Bela B. Edwards in the Quarterly Register, Vol. V., p. 183.  
 
of Trustees, and asked to be released from all participation in  
any Commencement Exercises, and from all further connection  
with the College. 1 But at the urgent solicitation of the Board,  
they consented to stand in their lot. Theophilus Packard deliv-  
ered the Salutatory Oration, David O. Allen the Philosophical,  
Hiram Smith a Greek Oration, and Elijah Paine the Valedictory. 2  
The Junior class supplemented their performances with a Dis-  
putation, a Poem, three Dialogues, and twelve Orations, as they  
when Juniors, had supplemented the Commencement Exercises  
of their predecessors the previous year. The exercises occupied  
the whole day, with a morning and an evening session. They  
received the usual Latin "Testimonial" from the Vice-President  
of the Board of Trustees, Rev. Joshua Crosby, who presided, no  
President having yet been appointed, and whom they honored  
for his services as Chaplain in the Revolutionary War, though  
they complained that " he had never studied Latin." They  
have never since regretted their perseverance in spite of all un-  
toward circumstances, even to the end, in consequence of which  
they have not only been reckoned as Alumni of Amherst Col-  
lege, but counted among its heroes who stood by it in the day  
of adversity, and constituted its second class. David O. Allen  
of this class, claimed to be the oldest graduate of Amherst, hav-  
ing received the degree of A. B. the first of any one, on this  
wise. While teaching school in Leominster, in the winter vaca-  
tion of his Senior year, he applied for the situation of Principal  
of Groton Academy, then a flourishing Institution and got the  
appointment. But after obtaining it, he found that a by-law of  
the Academy required the Principal to be a graduate of a College.  
Amherst, having no charter, could, at this time, confer no degrees.  
What was to be done ! He went to President Moore with his  
trouble. After much consultation, President Moore gave him  
testimonials to the President of Union College. Mr. Allen  
 
2 David Howard whose name appears on the Triennial, spent his Senior year  
chiefly at Yale College, and was not present to be graduated with his class. He  
 
as yet, his classmates were scarcely aware of his absence. After  
completing his course at Amherst, he taught the Academy at  
Groton, paid up his debts, earned money in advance for his  
theological education at Andover, and afterwards became one  
of the most honored of our American missionaries, and the  
author of the well-known work on " Ancient and Modern  
India."  
 
