CHAPTER XIII.  
 
TRUSTEES AND OTHER OFFICERS WHOSE CONNECTION WITH  
THE COLLEGE CEASED DURING THIS PERIOD, 1825-36.  
 
BEFORE we proceed to complete the history of President  
Humphrey's administration, we must pause a little to notice  
some of the Trustees and friends of the College whose connec-  
tion with it ceased during the period which we have been pass-  
ing in review. Six of these, Rev. Joshua Crosby, Rev. James  
Taylor, Nathaniel Smith, Esq., Rev. Experience Porter, Israel  
E. Trask, Esq., and Hon. John Hooker, were Trustees of Am-  
1761. Left in straitened circumstances by the loss of his father  
at sea when he was quite young, Joshua lived with different  
relatives, till, at length, to escape the tyranny of an uncle, at  
the age of fifteen he enlisted in the Revolutionary army in June,  
1776, and continued in active service about five and a half  
years, till near the close of 1781. For a few months he was on  
board of a privateer. Some time after leaving the army, while  
learning the blacksmith's trade in Hardwick, he became a sub-  
ject of a powerful revival of religion, and manifested so much  
zeal, and excelled so much in speaking that he was soon called  
upon to take a leading part in the meetings. A strong desire  
to preach the gospel now took possession of him, and notwith-  
standing obstacles that seemed almost insurmountable, in 1785  
he commenced fitting for College. After two or three years of  
preparatory study, partly in school and* partly under private  
 
years, 1 when under the pressure of pecuniary embarrassment,  
at the recommendation of the President, he left, and after a  
brief period of theological study, commenced preaching. On  
the 2d of December, 1789, he was ordained pastor of the church  
in South Greenwich, (now Enfield,) which office he continued  
to hold, (the latter part of the time with a colleague,) for al-  
most fifty years. He died, still senior pastor at Enfield, Sep-  
tember 24, 1838, at the age of seventy-seven. He was consid-  
ered remarkable for his gifts in prayer, and in extemporaneous  
speaking he probably had no equal in the Association. He was  
an active and faithful pastor, and was always much interested  
in the schools of Enfield and Greenwich.  
 
His zeal for maintaining and defending the faith of the Pil-  
grim Fathers moved him to take a deep and active interest in  
the establishment of Amherst College. He was a member of  
the Board of Trustees from the opening in 1821 till his death  
in 1838. For many years, perhaps until his death, he held the  
office of Vice-President of the Corporation, and subsequent to  
the death of President Moore, he was, for a while, acting Presi-  
dent of the Institution. The records of the Trustees show  
that he was often placed on committees of great responsibility  
and importance. His wisdom and firmness were relied on in  
during the administrations of Jefferson and Madison, his ser-  
mons on the state of the country were sometimes so severe on  
the national government as to drive some of his Democratic  
parishioners from the meeting-house. He had a marked predi-  
lection for military affairs, and held a chaplaincy in the militia  
during a large part of his ministerial life. When the militia  
were called out in 1814 for the defence of Boston, he accom-  
panied the Hampshire County troops, and such was the impres-  
sion made on officers and soldiers by his person and military  
knowledge, that on the resignation of Gen. Mattoon, (in conse-  
 
1 It will be seen from this that the students in 1823 were mistaken when they  
 
quence of the loss of his eye-sight) there was considerable talk  
of raising the chaplain to the rank of adjutant-general of the  
Massachusetts militia. In person, he was remarkably well-  
formed, having great muscular power, with a fine countenance  
and commanding presence ; and in his gait and bearing, he car-  
ried through life unmistakable evidence of his early military  
training. Tradition says that in the army, and for some time  
subsequent, he was a champion wrestler. After the settlement  
of a colleague, he represented the town one year in the Massa-  
chusetts Legislature. He was well fitted by his character and  
antecedents to fight the battles in the early history of Amherst  
Westfield in 1783. He graduated at Williams College in 1804 ;  
studied theology with Rev. John Taylor of Deerfield, whose  
eldest daughter he married, and was settled in Sunderland, July  
22, 1807, where after a ministry of nearly twenty-five years he  
died, still pastor of the church, October 11, 1831, aged 48.  
The church prospered greatly under his ministry, and enjoyed  
several powerful revivals of religion. That of 1816 is particu-  
larly memorable, and it was in the midst of the great revival of  
1831 in which large numbers were added to the church, that he  
ceased from his earthly labors.  
 
He was a zealous advocate of the temperance reformation  
from its commencement, and carried the principle and practice  
of total abstinence from intoxicating drinks so far that he re-  
fused to take them as a medicine in his last sickness. A warm  
quaintance and intimacy with Col. Graves, he became early and  
deeply interested in the founding of Amherst College. He and  
Col. Graves, and Esq. Smith had doubtless often prayed and ta-  
ken counsel together ori the subject, before a stone was laid.  
And his prayers and labor for it, ceased only with his life. He  
was a Trustee during a little more than the first decade, and  
 
lived to see the Seminary grow from a feeble Institution of  
charity into one of the largest Colleges in the land. The last  
year of his life was a year of the right hand of the Most High  
in the College, as well as in his own church, and he rejoiced in  
the spiritual prosperity of the former scarcely less than of the  
Mr. Taylor united a remarkably genial and joyful spirit. Hu-  
morous himself, " he laughed all over," (so an aged parishioner  
described it) at the pleasantries of others. " His preaching was  
clear, forcible and instructive. In person he was of middling  
hight and rather corpulent, with a full countenance, indicative  
both of kindness and a prompt, active and decided spirit." 2  
 
Nathaniel Smith, Esq., was born in Sunderland, August 4,  
1759. His early education was only such as could be obtained  
in the public schools of a country town in those days. An  
enterprising but prudent and successful business man, he was  
the founder of the Sunderland Bank, and its President for some  
time after it was removed to Amherst. He was for forty-six  
years an active and exemplary member of the church in his  
native place, and " soon after the death of Rev. Mr. Taylor, and  
in view of the feeble and desponding state of his bereaved peo-  
ple, Mr. Smith gave the society three thousand dollars to help  
constitute a permanent fund for the support of the gospel in  
Sunderland." 3 He made himself and wife life-members of most  
of the charitable societies which sprung up so rapidly in the lat-  
ter part of his life, contributed largely to their support as long  
as he lived, and left liberal bequests to the National Bible, Tract,  
Foreign and Home Missionary Societies. He was, by far, the  
largest pecuniary benefactor of Amherst College during the  
first decennary of its existence. And as Dr. Humphrey re-  
marks, considering that he belonged to a former age and was  
not himself a liberally educated man, this was very remarkable.  
" As nearly as can be ascertained, Mr. Smith whose property,  
 
1 A malignant typhoid fever was widely prevalent and very fatal in Sunderland  
in the fall of 1831.  
 
2 Packard's History of Churches and Ministers in Franklin County.  
 
it is presumed, never exceeded thirty thousand dollars, had con-  
tributed about eight thousand dollars to the College before his  
death, and his will contained a legacy of four thousand dollars  
more. But it is not these princely donations (and more than  
princely they were, considering his circumstances,) it is not these  
merely, or chiefly, which will endear his memory to the wise and  
good. It is the evidence that his whole soul was embarked in  
the enterprise of building up a new College as a Christian enter-  
prise, and that he was actuated by a supreme regard to the glory  
of God in the salvation of a dying world. Never shall I for-  
get how, from time to time, when all hearts were faint I was  
prompted almost instinctively to look to him as under Provi-  
dence the father of the Institution how affectionately he  
always received me how patiently he listened to my state-  
ments how unshaken was his confidence that 'the Lord would  
provide,' and how much encouraged and refreshed I returned  
to my work, after uniting with him and his eminently pious  
wife in commending all the great interests of education and re-  
ligion to Him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all  
that we ask or think." l  
 
Mr. Smith's wife, it will be remembered was a sister of Col.  
Graves, and his mother was a Billings of Conway, and natives  
of Conway are still living who well remember how Col. Graves  
and Esq. Smith used to bring up sometimes their wives and  
sometimes their minister, Rev. Mr. Taylor, to talk over and pray  
that Charity Fund which was the soul of the infant Institution ?  
Who gave his most anxious thoughts, his time, his prayers to  
the Seminary when it was weak and ready to die ? Whose  
name stands first on that subscription, which when this child  
was scourged and driven away by its mother for daring to ask  
for bread whose name, I say, stands on that subscription which  
was to settle the question of life or death in a few months ? To  
whom, in one word, is Amherst College so much indebted for  
pecuniary aid as to Nathaniel Smith ? "  
 
Nor did lie rob or wrong other objects in order to give to the  
church in Sunderland, to benevolent societies, and to Amherst  
College. He is still remembered in Sunderland as " the poor  
man's treasurer, the widow's friend and a father to the father-  
less." And some of the good old people there can still see him  
in memory and imagination, tall, portly, (for he was over six  
feet high and weighed more than two hundred pounds,) tower-  
ing above all the people, the most conspicuous person, as he was  
also the most constant attendant, in the church and the prayer-  
meeting, and " that noble and venerable form all radiant with a  
warm heart and a great soul."  
 
Esq. Smith held many public trusts, in the gift of the town,  
in the magistracy of the county, and in the General Court of the  
Commonwealth, and discharged them with enlightened practi-  
cal wisdom and unbending integrity. Yet this amiable and ex-  
cellent man, so loved and honored at home and abroad, so  
trusted in the church and the State, the largest pecuniary  
benefactor of the College and one of its wisest counselors, was  
abused by the tongues and the pens of its enemies in the Leg-  
islature, and with two others, (Rev. Messrs. Fiske of New  
Braintree, and Porter of Belchertown) excluded by the ac-  
tion of the Legislature itself from a place in the corporation !  
After an exclusion of three years, however, the Legislature  
of 1828 did what they could to make reparation for this egre-  
gious wrong by re-electing him to fill a vacancy. 1 Thus it  
happened, that in the annual and triennial catalogues of the  
College, the name of Nathaniel Smith disappears in 1825 and  
re-appears in 1828. Mr. Smith and his pastor, Mr. Taylor, were  
both among the original corporators named in the charter of  
Amherst Academy. And the name of the former is entered  
on the records as present at the opening of every meeting of  
the Board until his death. During all this time he was a  
member of the Prudential Committee, and acted a prominent  
part, especially in all the financial and business affairs of the  
College.  
 
Mr. Smith died February 25, 1833 in the seventy-fourth year  
of his age. On the 28th, President Humphrey preached his  
 
1 In place of Dr. Lyman, of Hatfield.  
 
funeral sermon entitled " the Good Arirnathean," from Luke  
23:50. On the 19th of March, Mrs. Smith, "not less vener-  
ated and beloved by all who knew her, as a mother in Israel,"  
followed him to the grave. Their tombstones are among the  
plainest and most unpretending in the cemetery at Sunderland.  
Their memorial is on high. And they will not soon be forgotten  
by the friends of learning and religion and the friends of Am-  
herst College. Self-distrustful, "he was found oftener in the  
valley of humiliation than on the mount." Her Christian life  
was all sunshine and her death triumphant. They had no  
children. But they have left a name better than of sons and  
daughters.  
 
Rev. Experience Porter was a native of Lebanon, N. H., and  
the son of Dea. Nathaniel Porter of that place. He graduated  
at Dartmouth College in 1803, and on leaving Colleg'e was ap-  
pointed Tutor in Middlebury College, where he remained one  
year. Having studied " Divinity " with Rev. Asahel Hooker of  
Goshen, Conn., he was ordained pastor of the church in Win-  
chester, N. H., November 12, 1807. On the llth of March,  
1812, he was installed pastor of the church in Belchertown.  
On account of ill-health he was dismissed by a mutual council  
March 9, 1825, and died at Lebanon, N. H., August 25, 1828,  
at the age of forty-six. " During Mr. Porter's connection with  
this people, there were two revivals of religion. The first com-  
menced in 1812 and continued about one year. During the  
year 1813, there were one hundred and seven persons united  
with the church upon a public profession of their faith. The  
next commenced in the fall of 1818 and continued about the  
same length of time. Before the close of 1819, there were two  
hundred and eight persons added to the church as the fruit of  
this revival " l The additions to the church by this one revival  
amounted to more than one-twelfth of the entire population of  
the town. " The church was greatly increased, strengthened  
and refreshed," says the judicious historian of the town, " the  
friends of Zion will ever rejoice in the blessed fruits of that  
religious revival." Such revivals were among the causes to  
which Amherst College owes its origin and inspiration to such  
 
revivals it was largely indebted for its early Trustees, Faculty  
and students.  
 
Mr. Porter was one of the original Trustees named in the  
charter of Amherst Acadenry. He was among the most active,  
zealous and faithful members of the Board in all those trying  
times which preceded the obtaining of the College charter. He  
was not among the members named in that charter, and it is  
generally understood that in common with Col. Graves, Esq.  
Smith and Dr. Fiske he had, by his energy and boldness in the  
service of the College, rendered himself obnoxious to some of  
the leading members of the Legislature. And he did not live  
long enough to be elected as Esq. Smith and Dr. Fiske were,  
to fill the earliest vacancies in the gift of the corporation.  
 
Mr. Porter possessed strong powers of mind, wrote with great  
rapidity, spoke with ease, boldness and strength, and forcibly  
impressed upon the hearts of others the great truths of the  
gospel which were deeply impressed on his own. He died in  
faith, with an unshaken trust of a blessed immortality. 1  
 
Israel Elliot Trask was the eldest son of Dr. Israel and Sarah  
(Lawrence) Trask, and was born at Brimfield, Mass., March 18,  
1773. While engaged in the study of law at Richmond, Va.,  
during the spring of 1794, the insurrection in Western Pennsyl-  
vania took place ; occasioned by the unpopularity of the excise  
laws passed by Congress. When the militia of Virginia and the  
neighboring States were ordered out by the President, and under  
Gen. Lee marched to the insurgent district, Mr. Trask volun-  
teered, and when at the close of the expedition the troops were  
disbanded, he returned to New England and finished his law  
studies in the office of Judge Jacobs of Windsor, Vt. He then  
entered the United States Army with the rank of Captain. He  
resigned his commission in 1801, and was about sailing for France  
in company with some College friends, to enlist in the French  
army; but while in New York, Gen. Alexander Hamilton, to  
whom he had letters, strongly advised him to give up his project  
and go to Natchez, in the then Territory of Mississippi, and com-  
 
Harding, the Attorney-General. About two years after his arrival  
at Natchez he was married to Elizabeth Carter, daughter of Jesse  
Carter, a planter at Second Creek, near Natchez, and settled on  
a plantation in that neighborhood. At the time that Louisiana  
was purchased from France, in 1803, by the United States, he  
.was sent by the Governor of the Territory (Claiborne) to attend  
to the negotiations with the French authorities, for the trans-  
fer of the new Territory. And when Gov. Claiborne went on  
with the United States troops to take possession, Col. Trask ac-  
companied him as his Aid. He opened a law office in New Or-  
leans (the first by an American), but after a short residence his  
health failed and he returned to plantation life. About 1812 he  
disposed of his plantations in Mississippi and Louisiana and re-  
turned to Brimfield, Mass. During his residence in Brimfield  
he interested himself in the manufacture of cotton cloth, and  
built one of the first factories for that purpose in "Western Massa-  
chusetts. He was elected for several successive years to the  
State Legislature, and was a member of the convention for  
revising the State Constitution in 1820; serving on the Judi-  
ciary Committee. In the spring of 1821 he removed to Spring-  
field, Mass. After his removal to Springfield, the state of his  
health and his business affairs requiring him to pass his winters  
at the South, prevented him from taking any part in public  
affairs. His death took place at the plantation of his brother,  
near Woodville, Miss., November 25, 1835, in the sixty-third  
year of his age.  
 
He became a member of the Congregational church in Brim-  
field, of which Rev. Mr. Vaill was pastor. At the time of his  
death he was a member of the First Church in Springfield, then  
under the pastorate of Rev. Dr. Osgood. He took an active in-  
terest in the benevolent and religious enterprises of the day to  
which he was a liberal contributor.  
 
The records show his presence and active participation in busi-  
ness, as a member of important committees, especially on finan-  
cial matters, at all the meetings of the Corporation from the  
organization in 1825 till his death in 1835, with a single excep-  
 
President Humphrey to confer with him on the subject and urge  
his continuance in office ; and at the next annual meeting in  
1832, we find him present, and elected a member of the Pru-  
dential Committee in the place of Nathaniel Smith, deceased.  
The amount of Mr. Trask's donations to the College is un-  
known. We find his name on the first subscription paper, that  
to the Charity Fund, for five hundred dollars, and " it is known  
that there was an outstanding subscription of three hundred  
dollars to the College, which matured after his death in Novem-  
ber and was paid by his executors." Doubtless he was a liberal  
donor to the College in all its great emergencies during the first  
fifteen years of its history.  
 
Hon. John Hooker was the son of Rev. John Hooker of North-  
ampton, the immediate successor of Jonathan Edwards in the  
pastorate of the church in that town. He was born in 1761,  
graduated at Yale College in 1782, and studied law in the office  
of Col. John Worthington of Springfield, who was his uncle,  
and one of the most eminent lawyers in this part of the State.  
After his admission to the bar, he settled in the practice of his  
profession in Springfield. He was for a time Chief Justice of  
the Court of Common Pleas, then a court whose jurisdiction  
was limited to the county or judicial district. Upon the di-  
vision of the old County of Hampshire in 1812, he was ap-  
pointed Judge of Probate in the new County of Hampden, and  
held that office tiU his death in 1829.  
 
He was for many years one of the deacons of the First Church  
in Springfield, and bore a very prominent and influential part in  
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. " He  
 
O  
 
was a man of excellent sense and great practical wisdom. His  
judgment was greatly confided in by men of different creeds  
and different political parties. He possessed the most unyield-  
ing integrity, and no one ever thought to move him a hair's  
breadth from the line of his honest convictions." 2  
 
one of the many ways in which Amherst College was linked in  
its origin to the cause of foreign missions.  
 
He was a constant attendant of the meetings of the Board,  
and his wisdom, integrity and weight of character contributed  
an element of great value to the infant College.  
 
Rev. Jonathan Going, D. D., of Worcester, appears on the  
catalogue of the College as Trustee from 1823 to 1831. But I  
find no trace of his presence at the meetings of the corporation,  
except at the annual meeting in 1826. And at the annual meet-  
ing in 1832, he resigned his seat in the* Board. His biography  
is given in the sixth volume of Dr. Sprague's Annals of the  
American Pulpit.  
 
Rev. Francis Wayland, D. D., of Providence is named among  
the corporators in the charter, being one of the new members  
introduced by the Legislature. He was present at the' organi-  
zation and first meeting of the Board under the charter in April,  
1825, but does not appear to have attended any subsequent  
meeting of the corporation, and at the annual meeting in 1829  
he resigned his trust. His life and labors hold a conspicuous  
place in the history of education and religion during the greater  
part of the last half century.  
 
The appointment of Dr. Going a.nd Dr. Wayland seems to  
have been accorded to the Baptists, in return for their sympathy  
and support in obtaining the charter, and together with the ap-  
pointment of a Baptist Professor about the same time, was  
doubtless expected to draw students from that denomination.  
The plan, however, was not very successful, and it was soon re-  
linquished.  
 
The new Trustees introduced in the Board by the Legisla-  
ture in the act of incorporation, were Hon. William Gray, Hon.  
Marcus Morton, Rev. Joseph Lyman, D. D., Hon. Jonathan  
Leavitt, Rev. Alfred Ely, Hon. Lewis Strong, Rev. Francis Way-  
land, Jr., and Elihu Lyman, Esq. 1 Rev. Alfred Ely continued  
a member of the corporation till 1854, and his life will be  
sketched at a later period in this History. We have already re-  
ferred to Rev. Francis Wayland in connection with Dr. Going.  
 
1 The order of the names and titles are here given as they are recorded in the  
charter.  
 
Hon. William Gray of Boston, Lieutenant-Governor of the  
Commonwealth in 1810 and 1811, whose name appears next  
after that of President Humphrey in the act of incorporation,  
died November 3, 1825, and never took his seat in the Board.  
He was the only Unitarian among the new members of the  
Board. Although he had never manifested much interest in the  
College, his appointment, probably, was not obnoxious to its  
friends, for it is a well-known tradition among the elderly peo-  
ple of Amherst that Col. Graves early cherished the hope not  
only of liberal donation's from him, but also of his conversion,  
and employed for some weeks, if not months, the means which  
he deemed suitable to both these ends with characteristic zeal  
and perseverance, but without any success. Six or eight years  
later, S. V. S. Wilder, Esq., whose connection with him as his  
business agent in Europe gave him access to Gov. Gray, made  
another attempt to enlist his wealth in behalf of the College  
with the same result. There were some rather striking inci-  
dental circumstances connected with this last effort, and the  
story as told in Mr. Wilder's slightly grandiloquent language  
is .too good to be lost. 1  
 
" Being appointed one of the Trustees of Amherst College,  
President Humphrey and the Trustees knowing my intimacy  
amount to some thirty thousand dollars, and after in vain en-  
deavoring to obtain a grant from the State Legislature of Mas-  
sachusetts, I was deputied by the Faculty and Trustees to wait  
authorized to assure him that Amherst College should assume  
his name, and that in the contemplated new College, two rooms  
should be appropriated in one of the best halls of said building,  
and being completely furnished, would be set apart for the ex-  
clusive accommodation of one of his descendants, who was to  
be furnished with board, fuel, lights, tuition and clothing from  
year to year gratuitously to the end of time. Thus authorized,  
 
1 See Records from the Life of S. V. S. Wilder, published by the American Tract  
 
I unfolded to him the object of my mission, and expatiated on  
*the advantages which, in this changing world, his descendants  
shall be sleeping in the dust, will have the proud satisfaction of  
casting their eyes from time to time on an Institution bearing  
the endeared name of their munificent ancestor ; and it may  
 
and I believe my property must take its legitimate course, con-  
scious that I shall leave property sufficient to save my descend-  
ants, for at least two or three succeeding generations, from be-  
ing under the necessity of having recourse to beneficiary aid to  
obtain an education.'  
 
" I replied, ' I hoped his calculations and predictions might  
prove correct ; but that such had been, so far as my experience  
extended, the unforeseen mutations of this sublunary world,  
that, without distrusting the goodness of a benign Providence, I  
considered a prudent foresight in providing against future con-  
tingencies as regards the welfare of those whom he had been  
instrumental of introducing into this wilderness world, as not  
only commendable, but highly judicious ; and I hoped that he  
might find grace to take this important matter under wise con-  
sideration that in pleading this cause of Amherst College, I  
felt that I was pleading to a more powerful degree, the present,  
future and eternal interests of his yet unborn posterity.'  
 
"'Mr. Wilder,' said he, 'my mind is made up. It needs no  
final farewell.'  
 
" Thus ended my last interview with Mr. , to whose  
 
property I had been instrumental, during my commercial rela-  
tionship with him, of adding upwards of one hundred thousand  
dollars. Years rolled on. Only seven years had elapsed after  
the tomb had closed on the mortal remains of that man, whose  
mountain, in his own estimation, seemed to stand so strong at  
my last interview, when two gentlemen entered my office in  
Wall street, and addressing me said : ' Sir, we believe you are a  
Trustee of Amherst College, and we have called to solicit your  
aid and to enlist your influence in admitting as a beneficiary to  
 
that Institution a grandson of j^our late friend, Mr. of  
 
Boston.' Judge of my amazement and of the conflicting emo-  
tions which agitated me on hearing this announcement. I re-  
 
who, by his extravagance and irregularities, spent all the patri-  
mony left him by his wealthy father ; that his mother had died  
of a broken heart, leaving eleven or twelve children, among  
whom was the young man in whose behalf they now sought my  
patronage, and whose miserable father was a mere wreck.  
 
" I was reluctantly compelled to say to said gentlemen, that  
none were admitted to Amherst College as beneficiaries on the  
income of fifty thousand dollars, except pious young men pre-  
paring for the gospel ministry ; and as this young man had not  
this in view, my intervention arid influence in his behalf could  
be of no avail.  
 
" On these gentlemen retiring from my office, I was left with  
a sorrowful heart, reflecting on the mutability of all earthly cal-  
culations, yet consoled with the cheering thought that the wise  
designs of God will, through all, be accomplished.  
 
" Little did my venerable friend or myself, at the time of our  
last interview, foresee that ere ten short years should have  
elapsed my own personal influence would be solicited to obtain  
the admission of one of his grandsons into that very Institution  
whose interests I was then advocating by endeavoring, though  
in vain, to induce this man of wealth to aid in its endowment,  
and, at the same time, secure to one of his descendants a colle-  
giate education down to the end of time."  
 
Hon. Marcus Morton of Tauntou, whose name immediately  
follows that of Hon. William Gray in the charter, and whose  
signature is attached to the charter as acting Governor, is  
continued on the catalogue till 1837, when his name is dropped,  
and the following note is found on the records of the corpo-  
* ration : " Voted, that Hon. Marcus Morton, having never at-  
tended a meeting of this Board and having never rendered  
any excuse therefor, has by such absence vacated his seat at  
this Board, and the same is hereby declared to be vacated."  
Mr. Morton had the reputation of being one of the best Judges  
of the Supreme Court ; and the fact that he was for many years  
the only Orthodox judge on that bench, together with the fact  
that he was the only Democratic Governor that the old Bay  
State has had for almost half a century, and that he was elected  
to this office by a majority of one vote, these facts have given  
him a rare notoriety in the civil and religious history of Massa-  
chusetts.  
 
Rev. Joseph Lyman, D. D., of Hatfield, was made a member  
of the Board of Trustees by the Legislature in the act of in-  
corporation, and his name appears on the catalogue from that  
time till the date of his death, that is, from 1825 to 1828. But  
he seems never to have attended the meetings of the Board, nor  
to have taken an active part in promoting the prosperity of the  
College. This is sufficiently explained, however, by the fact,  
that he was laid aside from all active effort for the last two  
years of his life by the cancerous humor which caused his death.  
It will be remembered that Dr. Lyman was the President of the  
Convention in 1818, which ratified the establishment of the  
Collegiate Institution at Amherst, although he was himself in  
favor of its location at Northampton. Born in Lebanon, Conn.,  
in 1749, graduated at Yale College in 1767, Tutor there in  
1770-71, ordained and installed pastor of the church in Hat-  
field in 1772, and continuing in that relation, (with a colleague  
during his last two years) until his death in 1828, Dr. Lyman  
was a leader in the ecclesiastical, and scarcely less in the politi-  
cal affairs of Massachusetts. He was an original member of the  
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, and in  
 
had qualities that would have graced the head of a nation, and  
especially the head of an army." 1  
 
Hon. Jonathan Leavitt was a native of "Walpole, N. H. He  
was born February 27, 1764. He was a graduate of Yale Col-  
lege in the Class of 1785. Having studied law with Judge  
Chauncy of New Haven, and then with Judge -Ellsworth of  
Windsor, Conn., to whom he was related, he commenced the  
practice of his profession in Greenfield, where he spent the re-  
mainder of his life. He was an active member of the Congrega-  
tional church in Greenfield, and a zealous defender of the evan-  
gelical faith with his pen as well as by his tongue and his per-  
sonal influence. His " Letter from a Trinitarian to a Unitarian,"  
and his " Gospel Message," were circulated as tracts through  
the community. Prevented by feeble health from attending  
many meetings of the Board of Trustees, he resigned his trust  
in 1829, and died on the 1st of May, 1830.  
 
Hon. Lewis Strong was the son of Caleb Strong of North-  
ampton, who was Governor of Massachusetts from 1800 to 1807,  
and again from 1812 to 1815. His mother was the daughter of  
Rev. John Hooker of Northampton, and sister of Hon. John  
Hooker of Springfield. He was born in Northampton June 9,  
1785, and graduated at Harvard College in 1803, in the same  
class with Prof. Farrar, Dr. Payson of Portland, and Dr. "Wil-  
lard of Deerfield. He studied law with his uncle, Judge  
Hooker of Springfield, and continued the practice of his pro-  
fession in Northampton for some thirty years, but relinquished  
it about twenty-five years before his death on account of severe  
suffering from asthma. Chief Justice Parsons said of him," he  
is the strongest lawyer in all the western counties," and Hon.  
Isaac C. Bates remarked that he " wished he had Mr. Strong's  
head on his shoulders."  
 
In 1812, Mr. Strong became a member of the church in  
Northampton, of which, in 1661, his ancestor, Elder John  
Strong, was one of the seven founders. He was elected deacon  
of the First Church in 1831, and resigned the office in 1858,  
 
Though one of the most able and influential men of the  
county in all public affairs, he shrunk from official position.  
Once only did he represent his county in the Senate of Massa-  
chusetts ; once he delivered an oration in Northampton on the  
anniversary of the nation's independence.  
 
Present at the organization of the Trustees of Amherst Col-  
lege in 1825, he attended every meeting of the Board, annual  
or special, till his resignation in 1833. During all this period  
he was also a member of the Prudential Committee, whose  
duties must have occupied much of his time, and he was con-  
tinually placed on the most responsible committees that were  
raised from year to year, such as those on by-laws for the gov-  
ernment of the College, rules for the action of the Board, re-  
vising the College laws, providing additional edifices, petition-  
ing the Legislature for pecuniary aid, etc. After eight years of  
arduous and faithful service he resigned his trust, and the fol-  
lowing vote of thanks was entered on the records: " Resolved  
that the thanks of this Board be presented to the Hon. Lewis  
Strong for his long and faithful services in behalf of the Col-  
plished, Christian gentleman, lawyer, trustee, citizen, neighbor,  
and friend, than Hon. Lewis Strong of Northampton. He died  
on Saturday, October 25, 1863, at the age of seventy-eight,  
universally honored and lamented.  
 
Hon. Elihu Lyman of Enfield, was born at Northfield, Sep-  
tember 25, 1782, graduated at Dartmouth College in 1803, com-  
menced the practice of law in Greenfield in 1807, was High  
Sheriff of Franklin County from 1811 to 1815, and in 1826 a  
member of the Massachusetts Senate. He died in Boston while  
the Legislature was in session, February 11, 1826, aged forty-  
three.  
 
He was present at the organization of the Board, and at its  
first annual meeting, at both which sessions he was placed on  
important committees. He died before the second annual meet-  
ing. A gentleman of high standing, fine person, courtly man-  
ner, and varied experience in public affairs, he was much la-  
 
mented by the friends of the College and by the community.  
He was a member of Rev. Mr. Crosby's church in Enfield at  
the time of his death.  
 
According to the charter the first five vacancies that should  
occur in the Board of Trustees, were to be filled by the Legis-  
lature. The first five appointments under the charter were  
Hon. Samuel C. Allen, Hon. James Fowler, Hon. Samuel Howe,  
year, 18289, and the only reference to him on the records of  
the corporation is a letter of apology for not attending the an-  
nual meeting of the Board at the Commencement in 1828. He  
was, however, a friend of the College, and when he was Gov-  
ernor of the Commonwealth in 1830, he gave Prof. Hitchcock  
the appointment of State Geologist of Massachusetts.  
 
Hon. Samuel Howe was present at the annual meeting of the  
Board at the Commencement of 1826, and also at the special  
meeting in December of the same year, and at the former he  
was chosen a member of the Prudential Committee for the year,  
and also placed on several special committees, to whom some  
of the most important matters were referred ; among the rest,  
that of the Parallel Course of Study recommended by the Fac-  
ulty. After 1826, his name disappears from the records. Judge  
Howe was born in Belchertown, June 20, 1785, and gradu-  
ated at Williams College in 1804. In 1822 he was appointed  
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, which office he held till  
his death. He died in Boston in 1828, at the age of forty-two.  
During his trusteeship and the greater part of his judgeship,  
he was also Professor or teacher in the Law School at North-  
ampton.  
 
Hon. James Fowler was a member of the corporation twelve  
years, being chosen by the Legislature in 1826, and resigning  
his trust in 1838. He was born January 4, 1789 ; was a grad-  
uate of Yale College in the Class of 1807 ; studied law under  
Judge Reeves at Litchfield one year, and was admitted to the  
bar in 1810, but never practiced the profession, having devoted  
himself from choice rather to agricultural pursuits. Mr. Fowler  
 
served the Commonwealth for many years in both branches of  
the Legislature and in the Governor's Council, being a member  
of one or the other of these bodies eveiy year from 1820 to  
1830. At the age of more than fourscore years, he is still liv-  
ing at Westfield, and enjoying in a high degree the respect of  
the community as a man of honor, integrity, public spirit and  
"philanthropy. His relations to the Trustees were always mutu-  
ally pleasant, and he doubtless contributed by his practical wis-  
graduate of Dartmouth College in the Class of 1794. He com -  
menced his public life as a minister in Northfield in 1795, but  
soon withdrew from that profession and engaged in the study  
and then in the pratice of law. He was a member of Con-  
gress twelve years, from 1817 to 1829. On the 7th of February,  
1826, he was chosen a Trustee of Amherst College by the Leg-  
islature to fill one of the first vacancies that occurred in the  
corporation and continued a member until his death. He died  
at Northfield, February 8, 1842, at the age of seventy.  
 
In 1833 he delivered a course of lectures on Political Econ-  
omy to the Senior class for which he received the thanks of the  
Board. He manifested a good degree of interest in the College  
and rendered faithful and valuable service to it for sixteen years.  
The contrast between his feelings and relation to the Institution  
and those of the representative of Northfield in the General  
Court who was one of the most violent opponents of the charter  
in 1825, 1 marks the change in public sentiment, especially in the  
denomination to which both of them belonged.  
 
Hon. Samuel Lathrop of West Springfield was a member of  
the Board of Trustees eleven years, having been chosen by the  
Legislature in 1829, and resigned his trust in 1840. He was  
born in West Springfield on the 1st of May, 1772, and was a  
graduate of Yale College in the Class of 1792. For eight years  
following December, 1819, he was a member of Congress. He  
was subsequently a member of the Massachusetts Senate. Dur-  
ing several of his last years, he was afflicted with bodily infirm-  
 
1 Rev. Mr. Mason, see p. 143.  
 
ity which obliged him to withdraw altogether from public life  
and from professional service. He had a large frame, command-  
ing appearance and dignified manners, and was highly esteemed  
in all his public and private relations. He was for many years a  
member of the church in West Springfield of which his highly-  
honored father, the venerable Dr. Joseph Lathrop, and his son-  
in-law, Rev. Dr. Sprague now of Albany, were pastors, and  
exerted a controlling influence in the parish. He died on the  
llth of July, 1846, in the seventy-fifth year of his age. 1  
 
During the period now under review, (the first half of Presi-  
dent Humphrey's administration,) four Professors, viz., Messrs.  
Worcester, Hovey, Peck and Park, terminated their connection  
with the College, and all by resignation, for the purpose of en-  
tering other spheres of usefulness.  
 
Samuel Melancthon Worcester was the son of Rev. Dr. Samuel  
Worcester, the first Secretary of the American Board. He was  
born in Fitchburg, September 4, 1801, but while yet an infant  
removed to Salem with his father who was settled there as pas-  
tor of the Tabernacle Church, April 20, 1803. He was a mem-  
ber of Phillips Academy, Andover, in 1818, and a graduate of  
Harvard College in the Class of '22, delivering an English  
oration at Commencement. In the autumn of 1822 he became  
a member of the Theological Seminary at Andover and there  
first made a public profession of religion. In September, 1823,  
he entered upon the duties of an assistant teacher in Phillips  
Academy, but after two weeks' service received and accepted  
the appointment to a tutorship in the Collegiate Institution at  
Amherst. In August, 1824, he was appointed teacher of Lan-  
guages and Librarian, and in the spring of 1825, at the organiza-  
tion under the charter, he was chosen Professor of Rhetoric and  
Oratory in Amherst College. In August of the same year, he  
was licensed to preach by the Hampshire Association. In De-  
cember, 1827, in company with Tutor Bela B. Edwards, he  
 
same time with " the Parallel Course," and even more short-lived  
than that experiment. " In May following," says Mr. Worces-  
ter, " the whole burden came upon me, and was sustained  
until December, 1828, when the paper expired, much to my sat-  
isfaction. During most of my editorship I preached regularly  
every Sabbath, at Granby."  
 
A law having passed the Legislature subjecting students to  
taxation, in the spring of 1829 the members of College saw fit  
to use the co-ordinate right of suffrage, and with the help of  
the better part of the citizens, elected Prof. Worcester a mem-  
ber of the House of Representatives. Those who were stu-  
dents at that time can not but remember Avith lively interest,  
the exciting scenes of this and a few subsequent elections,  
especially those held in East street, in which they marched to  
the polls in battle array, and holding the balance of power, chose  
whom they would for town officers. But the excitement and  
strife of such elections, together with the difficulty of collect-  
ing taxes of the students who came off victorious in many a  
ludicrous skirmish with the tax-gatherer, soon led to a repeal of  
the law. While a member of the Legislature, our Professor of  
Rhetoric found a congenial and worthy theme for his eloquence  
in defending with his tongue and his pen the cause of the Chero-  
kees against the Georgians.  
 
In the spring of 1831, the officers and students were called  
to s} r mpathize with the Professor in the loss of his only son, a  
child of rare promise, bearing his own name and then almost  
five years of age, whose remains they followed as sincere  
mourners to the grave.  
 
On the 4th of January, 1832, Prof. Worcester was ordained as  
an Evangelist, with particular reference to the wants of the  
people at Hadley Mills, (now North Hadley,) where he preached  
regularly from April, 1830, to March, 1833, and where his labors  
herst College nine years from 1825 to 1834, and pastor of the  
Tabernacle Church in Salem from 1834 to 1860, thus occupying  
the pulpit of his honored father for more than a quarter of a  
 
century. Dismissed from his pastoral charge in January, 1860, in  
consequence of ill health, but recovering his health by rest, he  
continued to preach most of the time in different places, and  
the last two years of his life he was a member of the Legisla-  
ture, first a member of the Senate from Essex County, and then  
wearied patience and conscientious devotion to his calling. He  
spared no pains in the improvement of his own mind and resour-  
ces, none in guiding and assisting the students, whether in gen-  
eral culture or in the studies of his department. A remarkably  
retentive memory, and pretty extensive reading, made him a  
full man. Nature and art conspired to make him a ready and  
fluent man. By precept and by example, in the lecture-room  
and in the pulpit, and, as occasion offered, on the platform, he  
magnified his office as Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory. He  
criticised wisely, patiently and faithfully the compositions and  
declamations of us students, and we students, in turn, criticised  
his public performances and laughed at, perhaps- mimicked his  
personal peculiarities. He had a habit of twisting his whiskers  
between his fingers and at the same time exhaling his breath in  
a kind of explosive puff which none of his pupils will ever for-  
get. But deeper far in the memory of their hearts they can not  
but cherish the remembrance of his kindness and faithfulness as  
an instructor, the wisdom and eloquence of his lectures, espe-  
cially those on English and American Orators, and the sin-  
cerity and earnestness of his discourses from the pulpit and of  
his exhortations as one of their religious teachers.  
 
Mr. Worcester was a learned and able Professor, but he was  
still better adapted and qualified for the work to which his heart  
also inclined, that of the ministry. And in that work while he  
was always an acceptable and edifying, and sometimes an inspir-  
ing preacher, yet his great strength lay, perhaps, in his charac-  
ter and influence, his life and labors as a pastor, by which he  
left his impress broad and deep and luminous on every family  
and every individual in his great congregation. At the time of  
 
sachusetts Legislature, of which he was the oldest member;  
and the freshest recollection, as well as one of the most sacred  
which he left upon the hearts of his acquaintances and friends,  
was that of his wise, firm, patriotic and Christian devotion to  
the country during those last five or six years of his life, in  
which Tier life was in imminent peril.  
 
Sylvester Hovey was the son of Sylvester Hovey, Esq., of  
Mansfield, Conn. His mother was the daughter of Rev. John  
Storrs of Southold, L. I., and after the death of her first hus-  
band, became the wife of Dea. Elisha Billings of Conway. Mr.  
Hovey was born at Mansfield, June 17, 1797. He was a grad-  
uate of Yale College of the Class of '19, and a Tutor there for  
four years. On the expiration of his tutorship, he took charge  
of the department of Rhetoric and Oratory another year dur-  
ing the absence of Prof. Goodrich in Europe. From- 1827 to  
1829, he was Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy  
in Williams College, and held the same office in Amherst Col-  
lege from 1829 to 1833. In 1831, he left his department in the  
hands of Prof. Snell, and for the purpose of health and general  
improvement made the tour of Europe. He spent a year and  
a half abroad, passing portions of the time in Italy, Germany,  
England, and the last half year in Paris, where he listened to  
the courses of lectures on Natural Philosophy and Astronomy  
by M. Arago, in the Royal Observatory of France. Con-  
strained by feeble health to relinquish his professorship, he re-  
tired to Hartford, Conn., where he died, May 6, 1840. " Prof.  
Hovey was marked for the symmetry and beauty of his mental  
development and culture. As a scholar he was accurate and  
profound. He received the first appointment on his graduation at  
Yale, and never ceased to cultivate and enrich his own mind while  
in subsequent years he devoted himself to the education of others.  
His attainments were varied, but peculiarly extensive in the  
departments of Natural Philosophy and Mathematical Science.  
At the same time, his mind was highly enriched and polished  
by the pursuits of elegant literature. In his rambles for health  
he became also a student of nature. The number and beauty  
of the specimens in his private cabinet of shells which he col-  
 
in search of health, and which he bequeathed to the College, bear  
ample testimony to the industry, zeal and success with which  
he devoted himself to such pursuits." l With more physical  
stamina, Prof. Hovey would have adorned almost any professor-  
ship. Before leaving Williams, he was invited to the presi-  
dency of Western Reserve College ; as he tendered his resigna-  
tion, President Griffin and some of the Trustees, with tears,  
assured him that if he had remained, it was their intention that  
he should be President of Williams College. But feeble health  
compelled him to be absent much of the time while he was nom-  
inally connected with Amherst; and the most vivid remembrance  
which his pupils associate with him, is his suffering and theirs,  
while, with trembling hands and throbbing nerves, he attempted  
an unsuccessful experiment with some delicate piece of appa-  
ratus. Curiously enough during all this time, and for a year or  
two after Prof. Hovey's resignation, the Trustees were afraid to  
commit the department to one who has proved on trial the most  
successful experimenter and the most lucid and methodical  
teacher in that department that Amherst or perhaps any other  
College ever had. While traveling and resting in Europe for  
his health, in 1832, Prof. Hovey rendered a valuable incidental  
service to the College by his judicious purchase of some eight  
thousand dollars' worth of books and philosophical and chemical  
apparatus, which quite dazzled the eyes of officers and students,  
and almost constituted a new era in the history of the Institu-  
tion. The collections of shells and minerals which he made in  
the West Indies, and which he 'bequeathed to the College, con-  
stituted a scarcely less important addition to the Cabinets of  
Mineralogy and Conchology.  
 
Professors Peck and Park are still living, and others must  
write their history.  
 
Rev. Solomon Peck was Professor of Latin and Hebrew from  
the reorganization of the Faculty in 1825 till 1832. The writer  
well remembers his tall and erect form, his dignified and cour-  
teous manner, his half-hour recitations and elegant translations of  
passages in the Latin Classics, and the chaste, classical style of  
his sermons as he took his turn with the President and the other  
 
i Rev. E. Russell, D. D.  
 
Professors in the College pulpit. Others will remember, per-  
haps, still more vividly the nice balance of duty to his Congre-  
gational wife and his Baptist conscience with which he waited  
without to accompany her home after the communion, and the  
zeal and success with which he labored to build up the Baptist  
%church in Amherst, of which he was the founder. After leav-  
ing Amherst, he was, for a short time, Professor in Brown Uni-  
versity, and then for many years the able and faithful Secretary  
of the American Baptist Missionary Union.  
 
Rev. Edwards A. Park, then colleague pastor with Rev. Dr.  
Storrs in Braintree, was elected " Professor of Moral Philosophy  
and Hebrew Literature, with a salary of eight hundred dollars,"  
at an adjourned meeting of the corporation, " convened at the  
house of Elijah Boltwood in Amherst, on Tuesday, the loth of  
October, A. D. 1833." The state of his eyes, however, forbade  
his entering upon the duties of the office for nearly two years.  
In the summer of 1835, in the absence of President Humphrey  
on a foreign tour, he commenced^ his labor, as Professor of In-  
tellectual and Moral Philosophy, the title and the work of his  
professorship having been changed to suit the Professor and at  
the same time to meet the existing wants of the College. In  
the summer of 1836 he accepted a professorship in the Theolog-  
ical Seminary at Andover, and at the commencement of that  
year he terminated his connection with the College, after a  
service of one year and one term. During this period he in-  
structed the Senior class in Intellectual and Moral Philosophy,  
Butler's Analogy and Political Economy, and the Junior class  
once a week in the Biblical Exercise. He also taught the  
Seniors Rhetoric until Prof. Condit entered upon the duties  
of his office in the fall of 1835. Readers of this History need  
not be told that during this brief period the students of  
Amherst were charmed by the same genius and eloquence  
which have since made Prof. Park the most inspiring and  
fascinating of teachers to so many classes at Andover, and  
"the Judas sermon" and "the Peter sermon" were then  
heard in the College chapel and the neighboring churches  
with perhaps even greater wonder and delight than have been  
 
mons which have since been delivered from so many of the  
pulpits of New England.  
 
The year 1835 was marked by the resignation and retirement  
from the active service of the College of one who had been its  
Treasurer and to a great extent its Collector from the beginning,  
and whom all the students of this first decade and a half will  
associate with the thrice-yearly payment of their College bills, l  
Hon. John Leland, who was at the same time one of the most  
faithful friends and benefactors of the Institution. He was born  
in Peru, Mass., in 1807, and was the son of Rev. John Leland  
of that place, one of those wise, devoted and useful ministers  
so common then in country parishes, and especially in our hill  
towns, who were passing rich on two hundred dollars a year,  
and who enriched their parishes and their families temporally  
and spiritually by their wisdom, virtue and piety. In 1820 Mr.  
Leland removed from Peru to Amherst, and at their meeting in  
November of that year the Trustees of Amherst Academy ap-  
pointed him " their agent to receive all donations made for the  
benefit of the Charity Institution other than those made to the  
permanent fund." From that time till 1826 he was the Treas-  
urer of the Institution, while Col. Graves was the Financier, as  
he was then called, who had the charge of the Charity Fund.  
From 1826 till 1833 he was both Treasurer and Financier. In  
1833 the Trustees separated the two offices, and chose Lucius  
Boltwood Financier, while they re-elected John Leland Treas-  
urer. This place he continued to hold till the Commencement  
of 1835, when he resigned his office. On accepting the resigna-  
tion the Trustees voted "that the thanks of the Board be pre-  
sented to the Hon. John Leland for his long and faithful service  
as Treasurer, and for the lively interest which he has ever taken  
in the prosperity of this Institution."  
 
Soon after his resignation Mr. Leland removed to Roxbury.  
He remained there, however, only a few years, and then returned  
to spend the remainder of his days under the shadow of the  
College, to the planting and nourishing of which he had devoted  
the better portion of his active life. He early became a mem-  
ber of the church, and was a deacon of the village church in  
 
1 Hence familiarly known among the students as " Deacon Term-bill."  
 
Amherst fifteen years before his removal to Roxbury, 'and fifteen  
3 r ears after his return. 1 He was a Senator from the county of  
Hampshire in the Legislature of Massachusetts for the years  
1833 and 1834, and a Representative from the town of Amherst  
in 1847.  
 
: Chosen Treasurer at the first meeting of the Trustees for or-  
ganization under the charter, he was at the same time chosen  
agent to collect the thirty thousand dollar subscription. How  
much labor and vexation this must have cost him", the reader can  
form some conception by inspecting any page of his books, a  
specimen of which may be seen in the Appendix. The small  
sums of which much of it was made up by contributions from  
cent and mite societies of women and children, was a fruitful  
theme of ridicule in the Legislature. Till 1829 he was not only  
Treasurer and Financier but also a member of the Prudential  
Committee, inspector of buildings, grounds and repairs, the  
working member of building committees, and in fact, general  
agent in all the fiscal and out-door concerns of the College.  
His salary as Treasurer was never more than three hundred dol-  
lars. As Financier he received an addition of only two hundred  
dollars. At the same time he was continually making himself  
personally responsible for borrowed money to large amounts.  
"I am assured," says Dr. Hitchcock, "that during most of his  
term of office he was holden to creditors for College debts to an  
amount sometimes nearly equal to his whole property." 2 Be-  
sides thus almost giving his time, toil and credit to the College  
for fifteen years, he gave it more money than has been given by  
any other person resident in Amherst. 3 Dea. Leland deserves a  
high place among the faithful servants and generous benefactors  
of Amherst College. He died in Amherst, February 18, 1864,  
at the age of seventy-one.  
 
1 Chosen May 5, 1820 ; re-elected June 29, 1838, and resigned on account of old  
age, May 24, 1853.  
make up the deficit of the charity fund, and he subscribed one thousand dollars on  
the paper which completed the fund and released the bond-holders.  
16  
 
